HEXAGRAM 1 THE CREATIVE 

The first and second hexagrams are essentially the same. That is, the first hexagram remains closest in 
spirit to the direction of the second hexagram because there is neither projection nor reflection. There is 
simply the spontaneous release of direction as the expression of self. Here in the first gate we are dealing 
with a role gate. We have six role gates: two of them in the sacral center and four of them in the G. Three 
of the four gates in the G are part of the cross of the Sphinx. The 10th gate is part of the Vessel of Love. 

Whenever you see a role gate in somebody's design, you know right away that this is something that 
dominates as a theme for them, to live out the essence or the nature of that role. The role that is inherent 
in the first hexagram is to express uniqueness. In the crudest language, it is simply to express mutation. 
By expressing uniqueness and mutation, we are speaking of the same thing. This is the difference that is 
always possible in the individual. 

In the first hexagram, like in the second, we have the repetition above the line of this term, "primal". 
These are primal forces. They divide the yin and yang of the wheel: the six yin lines in The Receptive 
(Hexagram 2) and the six yang lines in The Creative. 

Creation as a primal force. We have receptivity as a primal base and creation as a primal force. The 
energy potential to manifest inspiration without limitation. 'Potential' is a keyword because so many 
things are going to be necessary. To manifest inspiration without limitation' is a very important term to 
grasp. Mutation knows no boundary. Mutation follows on structure and order. Mutation is something that 
simply jumps. Remember, everything that has to do with the 1 and the 2 is all rooted in this center: tantric 
movement in that we have this pulsing of the individual process, the mutative pulse, the on and the off. 

The most important thing for anybody who carries the first gate is the recognition that the first gate does 
not have to be best. To be best is collective. When there is nothing new, everybody is competing to see 
who can be best. But when there is something new, no best exists. It is just new. Individuality always 
brings what is new and as such it cannot lead, it cannot project, it cannot be the witness, and it cannot 
reflect. It can only live out that nature. That is why, with energy, the potential to manifest inspiration is 
unlimited because the mutation transcends or can transcend limitation. 

1.1 Creation is independent of will 

The first line always speaks for the nature of the hexagram. Here we have the relationship between the 
self and the ego. The first thing we hear is that Creation is independent of will. Right away you have this 
keynote that says: look, this is not about what your ego is doing. This is not about your ego claiming that 
it is a creative font. The ego is just a motor. Unique direction is not about willpower: "I'll do something 
nobody else has ever done." Only somebody collective can say something dumb like that because to do 
something that nobody else has ever done is a mutation and it can only happen. We cannot create it. It is 
independent of will. 

The Moon exalted as the symbol of adaptation. Time is everything. This is so important to understand 
about mutation. It follows its own law. You have to wait for it and there is nothing that you can do. 
Remember that this is a first line. It is not transpersonal. It does not know that there is an 8th gate on the 
other side that is ready to make a contribution. It does not know that it can make that contribution. There 
is just this deep impulse to express one's uniqueness. Time is everything. 

Uranus in detriment. Instability leads to distortion. Here, patience is a virtue and revolution a vice. In the 
white book, the Uranus in detriment is: Creative instability unless there is patience. That is much more 

clearly stated there. In other words, you can't be an example right away. So many individuals go through 
life trying to be like the collective until that moment of mutation. You have to be patient. If you are, it 
will come. The moment you try to control it, the moment you try to drive it with willpower, then you 
become unstable. 

I have been creative all of my life. Every time my big ego tried to tell me that it was time to create, I 
would end up with enormous frustration. In those moments where the last thing on earth I want to do is to 
create anything, I will be driven to do it because that is the mechanism. You learn in time. Patience is a 
great teacher. Revolution, the desire out of the ego to express creativity, and to do it when you want to do 
it, leads to distortion. I have my South Node there. Time is everything. I had to wait nearly 40 years. 

1.2 Love is light 

With individuality, we are dealing with a number of things. First of all, we are dealing with people that 
are not designed to be interfered with. In individual gates, you do not allow anybody to interfere. We are 
in the lower trigram here, so the individual here does not even expect that there is somebody that is going 
to interfere. 

The other thing is that all individuality suffers from the chemistry of melancholy. All individuality is 
rooted in a happy and a sad cycle. Unique, individual expression or mutation is not something that 
happens all the time, every day. There is a process built into the foundation that says that this is 
something that has to be waited for and, in waiting, there can be a great deal of turmoil. 

When you come to the second line, it is very much involved in itself and in being what it is: being 
different. Somebody looks inside and sees that difference. In seeing it, the second line can be interfered 
with and brought out of their individual process. 

Here we have Love is light. What a lovely line. Venus exalted as a symbol of beauty. Remember, so 
much about direction has to do with beauty. There is a joke in this. Everybody knows that beauty is in the 
eye of the beholder. One person's rose is another person's cow-pie. That is the way things are. So we have 
this subjectivity that we are all looking for. What is beauty? What is the beautiful way? What appears to 
be the beautiful way for some is not necessarily the way for others. 

The required harmony between established values and ideals that enriches inspiration. The established 
value is simply to be oneself without interference and to fulfill one's life. The ideal is to maintain that 
capacity for individual expression. However, the 1.2's don't know that like the naturals in the 2.2. They 
just live that until somebody interferes because that will always happen to them. 

On the other side, the Mars side, again we have the presence of the ego force trying to step in. Desires and 
passions have their place but not at the expense of Creation. In other words, desire and passion have their 
place. Save desire and passion for your lover or for whatever it is, but to desire to be unique or to put all 
your passion in being unique is misplaced and always moody. 

In the white book: Self expression conditioned by ideals and values; or Self expression limited by desires 
and passions. In both cases, please understand something: the way in which this line will work is deeply 
connected to who this being will meet in their life because there are those people that will deeply interfere 
with that process. After all, this is a very powerful force. It is a penetrating force. There are those people 
that love to take that penetrating force and manifest it, bring it out. The second line, because it does not 
know that it is unique, is subject to being cranked up, to being pumped up, to having the ego built up: 
"You are really unique. You are really terrific. You have to put your desire and passion to this." They are 

being interfered with instead of being left alone inside their lit room. Whenever you are dealing with 
individuality, the more you let these people alone and do not interfere, the better it is going to be. 

Look at your own design, at any individual gate or channel you have. That is the, one place in your life 
where nobody has a right to interfere. The moment you let them interfere, a very important quality of 
what you are as a being gets lost. Individuality is not here to be interfered with. The collective is about 
sharing. Individuality is about ultimate empowerment. 

1.3 The energy to sustain creative work 

If you were a bookmaker and you were doing some gambling on who was going to be a mutative success 
and you had all the examples of the first gate and the various lines, the first thing to recognize is that there 
is a joke. The second and the fifth line normally are lines that can be very successful: the second because 
its quality is seen by others and therefore it is recognized, and the fifth because others will always project 
the best possibilities onto the fifth, at least at the beginning. Under normal circumstances one would think 
that the second and the fifth line of the first hexagram would in fact be the ones that are the most 
mutative. It is not true. They are deeply handicapped because they, more than any of the other lines, bring 
interference into their lives. If you are going to make a bet, you can bet on the first, third and fourth. Sixth 
lines, we never know. In the first, third or fourth, there is always the possibility for mutation because they 
are much better equipped to keep the outside from interfering. 

The third line is called: The energy to sustain creative work. Mars exalted as the symbol of a profound 
need for self-expression. Because what happens to these people is the trial and error process and because 
they do not know what is on the other side, they learn about interference. Because they have the capacity 
to adapt, they can learn from that interference. They have the Martian energy to keep pushing through and 
they will not let the interference get in the way. This is the first side. 

When you come to the other side, to the Earth in detriment: Material forces can disrupt creativity and lead 
to overambition. These are people who are actually very talented and who never get to fulfill the potential 
of their real talent because they get pulled into commercial possibilities, i.e. somebody who is struggling 
to be a legitimate painter who needs money, gets a job as a graphic artist and ends up being caught up in 
the world buying televisions, cars, mortgages, vacations and so on, and sells out their uniqueness to the 
mundane plane. This is the other side. Material forces can disrupt creativity and lead to over-ambition. 

So, in the third line, the exalted side can get past the interference even though it meets it and, in meeting 
it, it learns a lot because it learns to recognize what happens to its creative process when it is interfered 
with. Because of the Martian quality, it can keep on moving through. But on the other side, materialism 
disrupts creativity. The moment that you give a young painter 100 dollars for a canvas, you 
instantaneously change the way they produce their art because the materialism, if they have the detriment, 
is just going to pull them away from continuing their unique mutative process. 

One of the most common scenarios in our V*stern world is to have so many young, creative people that 
have been totally fucked up by money. It is amazing how many careers have been destroyed by easy 
money. Whether we talk about artists, actors or rock n' roll stars. This is part of the theme of direction, to 
wait for the right timing. 

The second and the third lines have similar problems in dealing with the outside, but the third is better 
equipped because it can adapt. The lower trigram in and of itself has a great deal of difficulty with trying 
to keep interference away. By the way, there is such a thing as positive interference. This is not to say that 
all interference is negative, like what the third line learns from being interfered with. There is a Chinese 
saying: good news, bad news, who knows? The person that interferes with you may turn you onto a 

different track where mutation can take place. We have strange allies in life but interference is the main 
theme here. 

1.4 Aloneness as the medium of creativity 

When we come to the upper trigram, we come to a very special fourth line. The fourth line has a harmony 
to the first line and what we learned in the first line is that creation is independent of will, not only the 
will of the artist but the will of others and their interference as well. Here we have the transpersonal 
harmony to that. In other words, what you have in the fourth line is the recognition that there is an 8th 
gate at the other end and that the contribution can be made. The recognition of what is on the other side, 
something very deep, is at work here. 

This line is called: Aloneness as the medium of creativity, not 'interference as the medium of creativity'. 
The fourth line will externalize that in a one-tracked way. Fourth lines can be so very successful and can 
bring mutation into the world because they are one-tracked in recognizing the value of aloneness. The line 
says: aloneness as the medium of creativity, not as the medium for contribution, just for the creativity. It 
is clear that when one has to be creative, one needs to be alone. That does not mean that one has to be 
alone one's entire life. It means that only the creativity can not be interfered with. 

The tension of inner light. That is the overview. Think about what the real creative process is. The real 
creative process is to build that tension over a life-time. It is an inner tension because the creative process 
requires tension and because you have to wait for those moments in which the mutation really works. 

The Earth exalted as a symbol of a personal perspective manifested outside of influence. Jupiter in 
detriment. Where the potential magic of inspiration is diluted. This is a very bizarre line because as far as 
I can tell, there are only two lines in the whole book, 1.4 and 1.6, where you have Jupiter in detriment and 
there is no explanation given. Nothing. 

The first thing to realize in the aloneness: creativity must develop outside of influence. What happens in 
the detriment is not that these people give up the aloneness for their creativity, what happens is that once 
they have the mutation, they become fixed on externalizing it and they give up further possibilities of 
mutation. An example: let's say there is somebody who has written something and it is really good and 
they want to get it out in the world. They will stop writing and they will spend their time, their creative 
energy, trying to get somebody to recognize it and to be very fixed on getting it out into the world. Or 
they write other books following the same recipe, the same theme, endlessly. 

In the white book there is an explanation of it: The need to influence that abandons aloneness and limits 
creativity. Please understand, it does not mean that they are different than the exalted in terms of not 
allowing people to influence them. They don't. They end up getting influenced in trying to bring out into 
the world what they have, not the creativity itself. They get caught up in marketing, in trying to get things 
out and they lose their creative feel. In order for them to get back to their creativity they have to go back 
into their aloneness. 

1.5 The energy to attract society 

This is one of these fifth lines that are very difficult, as I mentioned earlier. Here you have the projection 
that is coming from everyone: this is the talented one. The moment that there is this constant projection, 
there is all kinds of interference. "You are so talented. Why don't you do something?" Fifth lines always 
present this possibility. In other words, fifth lines can be an enormous advantage in life. If you look at 
your own fifth lines, you realize that this is where people are projecting on you. You will always get the 
positive projection before you get the negative. That is true of all fifth lines. Everybody looks at a fifth 

line and is hoping for the best out of that fifth line. When they get disappointed, then they project the 
other way but you are always given the benefit with a fifth line. 

In the fifth line of the first hexagram, this assumption that one is creative is very attractive to society. 
Society likes to know that there are those creative, mutative forces around. It is not necessarily conducive 
to creativity because it is always pulling interference. 

Mars exalted for its powerful ego endurance. The only thing that is left in the fifth line is that everybody 
is coming to the fifth line saying, "You have such talent" and they end up just riding this ego field. When 
you see these people you see them on television, on game shows. These are the kind of people that did 
something once, long ago, that everybody at the time projected was really talented and they never did a 
bloody thing ever again, but they made a living of being considered creative ever since. Television is full 
of these people. Life is too, by the way. 

The other side is the Uranus in detriment, where eccentricity can handicap endurance. This is the example 
of Oscar Wilde. He did not give his energy to his talent, but to his life. (The actual quote is: "I gave my 
talent to my life, not my art.") We are dealing with a freak circuit here. We are dealing with individuality; 
we are dealing with the outsider and what happens to these people is that they try to just live what the 
outside world wants, which is to be like a creative person. Society has created the illusion of what a 
creative person is. Usually they are poor drunks or have terrible problems with women, beat their 
children, steal money or take drugs but do manage to produce every once in a while things of beauty that 
everyone appreciates. If you do not really have the depth or the skills, you can still play the role. It is a 
role gate, after all. 

These people with the 1 .5 in detriment are out there playing the creative role and everybody is accepting 
that, except that they get more and more eccentric to get the attention. All individuality is seeking 
attention. The more eccentric they become, the sooner the whole game will crash. Then they are famous 
has-beens. They used to be creative; they are not anymore. The endurance is that they put up with the 
interference. They have no choice. They attract society. They can be very valuable in the sense that, 
because they attract society, they can get mutation out into the world. Unfortunately for them, that 
attraction comes so quickly in life that they rarely get a chance to mature as creative forces. So what they 
end up doing is just being able to handle through the ego those forces that are constantly trying to 
interfere with them. 

There is a famous writer in America named Truman Capote. He wrote 'In Cold Blood' which made a 
couple of million dollars for him. He was a very bizarre homosexual with very funny habits. He made all 
this money and could not write anymore. He kept on telling people that he was working on a novel and he 
did that for 22 years until he died. When he died and they went through all of his papers, that book did not 
exist, but he had an incredible endurance. 

There is a famous story about him. He wrote the screen play for the film African Queen' with Humphrey 
Bogart and in those days, when they made the film, he literally had to change the script every single day 
so that they all had to work together, the writers and the actors. Bogart was somebody who was very 
crude. Capote had a funny little voice, a kind of squeaky, high pitched voice. He really sounded hilarious 
when you heard him speak. Bogart was making fun of his voice and one evening Bogart challenged him 
to an arm wrestle and Capote beat him. This was something that really humiliated poor Bogart. Capote 
was quite a funny character. 

The truth is that what the outside wants from creative people is that they do not bring any mutation 
because it is frightening, but they are allowed to be fools and clowns. They are allowed to be the symbols 
of creativity and they are allowed to have creative characters as long as they do not bring mutation. 

Society does not like mutation. It makes them very uncomfortable. Sometimes the real creative ones are 
shunned. 

The whole thing about creative expression as a role, the mystery and secret of that, goes back to the very 
first line. The very first line talks about Time is everything. Everything about the creative process is about 
time because mutation is not something that you can truly appreciate in its time. When mutation takes 
place, the fact that mutation takes place in any given moment is a mystery to the vast majority of the 
planet. It takes place in a unique individual and it will have its time. We live in a different kind of age, in 
an age where we are able to transmit information images simultaneously, instantaneously, wherever 
mutation is taking place in the world. But time is the quality that distinguishes whether a mutation is 
valuable or not. I doubt very much if anybody 300 years from now will pay any attention to Andy 
Warhol. I doubt that. 

The perspective of whether a mutation really has been of value, whether a mutation has really been 
effective or not, we are blind to that in our own time. It is one of the things to realize why the artistic 
spirit longs for immortality. Immortality is something that you only hear from the creative spirit because 
it recognizes that only time, a lot of time, is going to distinguish whether something is truly art, truly 
great, and truly mutative. Only then, and it will take time before the perspective can be there that looks 
back and says, "Ahal That was something that really made a difference. That was something that brought 
a mutation.," So it is a question of time. 

The creative force in the first line recognizes that timing controls the creative process at work. In other 
words, one cannot push it. One has to wait. It has its own timing and the fact of the matter is that even 
when the mutation has taken place, there is no place for expectation. This is not abstract. This is not 
collective. This is not about being best. This is simply about the recognition that mutation has taken place 
and one lives with that mutation until the end of one's days. Time: generation after generation, in their 
looking back, to see clearly the value of whether something was art, was beautiful, was the right direction, 
was a mutation, only then can that be clear. 

1.6 Objectivity 

This leads us to the dilemma of the 1.6 because the 1.6 knows that. It sits up there on top of the house of 
creativity and it looks across to the 43.1 which says, "Hey, patience." All resistance has to be eliminated. 
This has to get out into the world. The mutation has to take its place. It takes a long, long time. You will 
never live long enough to appreciate the impact of that mutation. I know that. I live that. What I share 
with you, what we work with in Human Design. There is no possible way that I can see what that is going 
to be because the perspective on that will take place long after I'm gone. 300 years from now or 400 years 
from now, somebody may be able to look back on that perspective and see the mutative value and beauty 
in all this. It can't be judged now. It can only be lived as a mutation now, nothing else. 

The 1.6 is a question of Objectivity. Clear assessment of creative value. But how do you know? What we 
consider to be high art today, what will it be tomorrow? We don't know that. There are millions and 
millions of pieces of creativity that are garbage, long forgotten. Not everything can be mutative. So this 
question of what is of creative value becomes an enormous dilemma for the 1.6. It looks out and says, 
"Yes, okay. I look at it now. It seems to be okay, but how will this stand the test of time?" Go out in the 
street and look at one of these new buildings. It may be attractive today in our consciousness, maybe. 
What will it look like from the next phase looking back? Will it still have a place? Will we be pleased to 
see those buildings survive? I doubt it. Clear assessment of creative value. That is the point. 

The Earth exalted with no explanation; it does not say anything about this. This clear assessment is a 
lifelong process and, at the end of your life, it can only be comparative and you still do not know. We are 

talking about mutation. Human beings are so damn selfish. They want everything in their time. We are a 
species and our species operates beyond generational borderlines. It is a movement. Mutation is a 
movement and it goes far beyond a single lifetime. Any mutation that is of value travels hundreds of 
generations. This is something that can only be judged in time by looking back. 

Pluto in detriment. The risk that subjective appraisal will result in disappointment and creative frustration. 
Well, you are not going to get a lot of creative expression out of a 1.6 because they recognize clearly what 
really will be mutative. What happens in the detriment is that there is this subjectivity that comes in and it 
only comes early in life that pulls them saying, "Yes, this is it." That is the person who says, "This is the 
most beautiful thing." This subjective appraisal leads to disappointment because time just passes it by and 
five years later nobody is interested in it because it is just a fad. It was not really of creative value and it 
did not really bring a mutation. Then the 1.6 stands back and says, "Okay." 

In the white book, the Earth is given its value. Clarity in creative expression. Remember the relationship 
between the sixth line and wisdom. Though the 1.6 is not involved on a moment by moment basis with 
trying to assert its creative uniqueness, it has a much greater process going on. That process can flower in 
the end. That is the perspective that really sees clearly whether the mutation is something that will have 
that generational transcendent power to it. Nobody can recognize that better than a 1.6, sitting on the roof 
of the house, looking at the creative impulse of the world. It has the capability of objectively saying, 
"That mutation will take hold. That will go. I bet that 400 years from now, everyone is doing that." 

That is the possibility that lies there as wisdom. It is about time. The nature of bringing love into the 
world is not about loving your neighbor; it is about loving yourself. (This is something that I get to when I 
talk about the vessel of love.) The important thing about bringing real true creative mutation into the 
world is simply about these individual forces being themselves, nothing more and nothing less. What 
happens is that we have this enormous need of the ego to assert itself because we need to survive on the 
material plane. The material plane is: feed me now, fill my stomach now. Mutation is not about that. It is 
not. It takes its time. 

HEXAGRAM 2 THE RECEPTIVE 

lMe come to the Sphinx, to the nature of the G center, to the concept of self. Keep in mind about the 
nature of the G center that this is where the magnetic monopole is. The monopole has two basic functions, 
one of which is to hold us together in the illusion of our separateness: what we call love. The other aspect 
of the G center is the aspect that hooks us up to our geometry. It moves us along in our trajectory in space. 
This is the Sphinx and this is the nature of direction in life. 

One of the things to keep in mind about the Sphinx is that it has this configuration with all gates in the G 
center, of the second gate below and the three other gates pointed up to the throat. All of those three gates 
are role gates. Only one gate in the Sphinx gives direction: the second gate. It is the only one. The nature 
of direction for humanity is an evolutionary direction which is rooted in mutation. No matter how logic 
establishes the validity of a pattern, that pattern can always be destroyed by mutation because mutation is 
the way of life. The fact is that the second gate is the gate that transforms mutation into direction. 

The driver is in the second gate, but the perspectives vary. The other three gates represent perspectives of 
the driver. So, you have the driver who, while he is driving along, is staring intensely out of the front 
window and is literally looking into the future. This is the logic driver in the 7th gate and that is his 
perspective out of the 7th gate. Then you have the driver who, while the car is driving along, is always 
looking in the rear view mirror. He always has to see what is behind him and where he is coming from. 
This is abstract perspective. This is the 13th gate looking backwards out of the rear view mirror. Then 
there is the perspective in which, while the car is driving along the road, the driver is looking at his own 
hands on the dashboard. This is the driver, relatively speaking, in the now and it is the perspective that 
comes out of the 1st gate. 

Remember, it is the same car driving on same road in the same direction. This is so important to 
understand: the direction is not altered by the perspective. The perspective is simply on the movement. 
So, if you talk about direction, when you look for direction in somebody's chart, do not confuse direction 
with the role gates of the Sphinx. These are perspectives. The direction is always coming out of the 
second gate, the driver. 

Above the lines there is a very important comment here. In The Receptive, we are dealing with the most 
yin of all hexagrams. Receptivity as the primal base through which any response is determined. The root 
of action. Everything about what we are going to do as a totality and where we are going to move to in 
this life as a totality is rooted in this gate, The Receptive. This is a primal base. Out of this all direction 
comes. Out of this all evolutionary action comes. 

Keep in mind the fact that the driver always needs access to other things. Vie are not talking about how 
this comes out in somebody's design. Vv are talking about the nature of this gate. The driver can end up 
being starved for fuel, not having the 14. The nature of this gate is that this is where direction, origin, is. 
This is the core of that. It is truly the driver. 

2.1 Intuition 

The first line always gives you the basis. It is called Intuition here. It says, as an overview: Sensitivity to 
disharmony and atrophy. This is very important. 

Venus exalted. The importance of aesthetics, whether inborn or acquired. What is direction? One of the 
things that pleased me the most about Human Design was that it was pretty. It has to do with aesthetics. It 
sounds poetic, but it is true that our direction is about trying to find the most beautiful way. It really is our 

direction. We are trying to find a way to avoid ugliness and disharmony, so the importance of aesthetics, 
whether inborn or acquired. 

Mars in detriment. The assertion of ego in spite of wisdom. Look, this is a first line. It tries to figure out 
what the direction is. What is the direction and how does that direction work? 

In the white book: Higher knowing through aesthetics. The thing to recognize about our direction is that 
what we are trying to find, what everybody is looking for, what people call paradise, happiness, bliss, is a 
direction that brings us pleasure and that brings us beauty and harmony in this life. It is not such a bad 
thing to know that humanity, at its foundation, in terms of the direction it is moving towards, is looking 
for beauty and harmony. It does not mean that it is going to get it. However, it is a very nice place to go. 

The other thing is that ego, willpower, is not what direction is all about. It is not the ego that dictates 
whether you go this way or that way. Direction is not something we control. Direction is a mutative force. 

The detriment here is: The urge for action that will ignore the wisdom of the Higher Self. The wisdom of 
the higher self says: the direction is already there. Do not impose will on this. People who have the first 
line in detriment will try many times in their life to alter direction by willpower only to discover that it is 
disastrous for them. Our direction is towards beauty and harmony. This is the Sphinx after all, and part of 
the great mystery of what the Sphinx is. Not bad; let's keep working at it. (It is my North Node.) 

You will notice that in three of the six lines, the word 'ego' is mentioned. In the other three lines, where 
ego is not mentioned, it is implied. The great dilemma of the self is that ego is a motor and it always 
claims direction in this gate. The ego wants to be able to say, "I am in charge of the direction", rather than 
seeing that the driver simply drives and the passenger sits in the back seat. Whenever you see the ego 
applied here, understand that this is the basic conflict that always exists between G center gates and heart 
gates. The ego wants to make claims on the self. 

2.2 Genius 

The second line is Genius. It is a very special line when you think about what second lines are: the light in 
the room where people look in from the outside. Everybody looks at the 2.2 and says, "They know where 
they are going." The person that has that second line, they do not know that they know where they are 
going. They may be deeply confused about where they are going. They may have no idea that they are in 
the right direction, but everybody is looking inside and saying, "They know where they are going." 

Unconscious and unlearnable alignment of stimulus and response. The natural. That is somebody who is 
naturally going along in the right direction, not because they have the talent or the skills, but simply 
because that is what they are meant to do. The gift of all second lines is that they do not know how to 
interfere with themselves. That is a blessing because it just comes out. What happens, though, is that other 
people jump in and it is their interference that creates dilemmas. Others jump in and say, "Do you realize 
that you are going in the right direction? That is terrificl" Those others are pumping up their ego, trying to 
get that second line to think, "Yes, it is me." 

The natural. Saturn exalted. The inner strength to focus and realize. Just to be in your direction, without 
even knowing that this is a direction, means just to be in your life. 

When you come to the Mars in detriment, you have: Genius as madness. Knowledge exclusively as power 
for the enhancement of the ego. This is the moment where somebody steps in and looks inside, sees the 2 
and their direction and says, "Wow, you have really done it," and they say "Yes, and I'll tell you how I did 

it." Then they really get into trouble. These are people that are always claiming that they have achieved 
power out of knowledge. 

In the white book: A natural gift for unlearnable knowing; or The delusion that knowledge is power. This 
is the delusion that your direction is the result of your genius, your hard work, or of you being marvelous. 
Paper tigers. They will get a terrible surprise. 

The driver in the lower trigram does not even know that there is a gas pedal at the other end and therefore, 
you can't expect that the capacity to drive is something that necessarily happens. They are always 
surprised that there is a gas pedal because they do not expect it to be there. They are basically just reading 
maps. The first line is looking at all the various maps that are around, and the second line has a map that 
is just wired into its brain. It is just there, but it does not mean that they go anywhere unless they get 
access to energy. Nor does it mean that they know how to handle the energy when it is there. It is one 
thing to be a good driver but if you don't know how to use the gas pedal, you can end up smashing into a 
tree simply because you are out of control or because you cannot handle the fuel. This is still lower 
trigram. 

2.3 Patience 

As you see when we discuss the gates of the G center, their lines are often very special in comparison to 
other lines of the same kind. This is particularly true for the 2.3. We know third lines represent an 
adaptation process. These are lines of trial and error. This is a highly exalted third line. Mutation is a 
matter of trial and error. This is something that we know. Mutative processes are going on all the time and 
they are trial and error until the right and most successful mutation takes place, takes hold and gains its 
strength. The other mutations just disappear because they were not productive. What that means is that the 
mutative process at its very best is exemplified through the third and the sixth lines. The third line 
provides, in the mutative process, just the right mix: trial and error to find the right mutation. 

So here we have Patience. The teacher that never stops being a student. This is the trial and error. 
Everyone who carries the second gate is a teacher in life in the sense that they are always providing 
direction, whether they want to or not. That is what 'teacher' means in this sense, but they can never stop 
being a student in life. In other words, they think that they are in the right direction and something 
happens and they try something else, until they finally get it. 

Jupiter exalted. Dedication to a lifetime of receptivity with the maturity to accept that the process never 
ends. Mutation is not going to stop. It is an ongoing process. We must never lose our vigilance and we 
must realize that all kinds of mutative possibilities are in the world at the same time looking for 
supremacy. In the same way that our genetic material is constantly in competition for which genes will 
dominate in the global gene pool, this is an ongoing process that we are involved in. 

When you get to the Uranus in detriment though, you get: For the revolutionary, patience is a vice. This is 
the pull of the ego again that says, "Oh, not another change. This direction is the right one, and I will stay 
with it. I can't afford to go to another one." Or it is the opposite of that, which is jumping from one thing 
to the next rapidly, constantly breaking the bonds. This is very destabilizing. It is important to see that 
those people that have the 2.3 have to be aware that for them to have many directions in life is not only 
natural but healthy. It is healthy for them to break the bonds of direction and try another one until you 
finally see what really works in that sense. 

In the white book: The recognition that receptivity is a lifelong process. For these people, it is an ongoing 
process of seeking out the mutative way. By the way, though it is a process that never ends, it does not 
mean to change direction until the end. They can mature into this process and simply become those that 
provide others with a guide to the best and the most mutative directions in life. 

On the other side: Higher knowing that cannot wait and demands expression. The reason that this third 
line learns so much is that it does not know that there is a gas pedal and gets to meet it regularly. Because 
it is adaptive, every time that it gets a new fuel, it experiments with a new direction. People often 
misunderstand what that means: you may be the driver but the fact of the matter is that the driver alone 
does not control the direction. He can't. The driver cannot control the direction without the gas pedal and 
the fuel. An example: I am a carnivore. If I want food, I will look for a place that has meat. JOrgen is a 
vegetarian. If he wants to find food, he will go for a place that is vegetarian. We may both go in the same 
direction (we need to feed ourselves) but we will actually take a different course because the fuels are 
different. 

So what happens to the third line is that it experiments with all the different fuels that it meets until it 
finds the fuel that works. What you have learned in terms of hexagram structure, resonance and 
harmonies, you can see right away what will happen to the third line: when it meets a 14.3 or a 14.6, it 
will find the kind of fuel that it can really work with. But it will still have to go through the dissonances, 
the difficulties of matching up with fuels that do not necessarily work. It is a learning process. But this is 
a very mutative line. 

2.4 Secretiveness 

When you get to the upper trigram, things change, obviously. You come to a transpersonal line that 
knows that there is something on the other side. All fourth lines are rooted in opportunism. Opportunism 
exists in all fourth lines and waits for the opportunity. Fourth lines are one -tracked and unidirectional. 
They are there to externalize. 

Here we have Secretiveness. More than modesty, the ability to preserve harmony through discretion. It is 
so important for a 2.4 to externalize the very foundation. In doing that, it has to be very careful about not 
letting other people interfere with the direction. This is an individual gate. Individuals, particularly in 
highly mutative gates, are not around to be influenced by anyone else. The whole business of direction 
carries with it a lot of weight. If a 2.4 is driving a car and you are driving with them and you both know 
where you think you are going, that 2.4 is not going to tell you until they make that funny left turn that 
they are going on their own direction. They have another way to get there. If they tell you beforehand, 
you are going to interfere, which will result in a problem. 

Venus exalted. The higher goal transcends personal acclaim. The team player, acknowledged as the leader 
but never the captain. Nobody wants a mutative person as their captain because they are unreliable, but 
they can be great leaders. In other words, the turning of the wheel in that direction may annoy the captain, 
but it may turn out to be good advice and good leadership and the captain will go along with it. The whole 
thing for 2.4's is to recognize the importance of secrecy in their life. Don't let other people in on the 
direction. Just do your thing. After all, individuals are here to be examples. They are not here to lead. 
They are not here to be witnesses. They are just here to be examples. This mutative direction is all about 
living it out as an example. 

When you come to the Mars in detriment: Loose lips sink ships. The unquenchable fire of the ego 
engenders enmity. This is the ego saying, "I know that you are over there but I will make a left turn now, 
okay? I want to take a different way." Everybody else gets upset and the 2.4 says, "I want to go this way 
and I know this way." 

In the white book: Where higher knowing does not have to be expressed to be recognized; and the other 
side: The inability to keep silent when the opportunity arises for expression. This is what happens to the 
self the moment that the ego comes in: it creates all kinds of difficulties. It takes away the value of the 

possibility of spiritual recognition. Direction is something that is given to us and not something that we 
can claim. 

When I was a teenager in Canada, we had all kinds of movies that showed groups of three or four boys 
and one of them would be the acknowledged leader but this one would not have a driver's license. So, 
somebody would have to drive the car and the one who would do this would be the 2.4. If they kept it 
secret, they could enjoy being in charge of everybody by driving that car, even though the leader was 
sitting in the car. That is the exalted side, but the moment they say, "Hey, we are going my way because it 
is my car," is the moment they get into trouble. That is the detriment. 

2.5 Intelligent application 

Fifth lines are the way society wants to see direction. The people with the 2.5 get projected on that they 
are the ones that know the direction, that they are the ones that have the way. The line is called: Intelligent 
application. The strategist. It is about developing a strategy of how to deal with that projection. If people 
project on you that you know the way, well, what do you do with that? Do you really know the way? 

There are two sides to this. One side is the Mercury exalted. The strategist. Reasoned management of 
resources. After all, the 2.5 is at its very best; gas pedals are always recognizing them. Gas pedals always 
come up to them and say, "You are the one that has the direction. Do you want my fuel?" The whole thing 
for a 2.5 is to learn how to manage those resources because they do not have the resources themselves. 
That is inherent in the gate, but how it operates is dependent on the design. They are always looking for 
the resources from others that come to them and they manage those resources to be able to maintain their 
direction. 

The other side, the Earth in detriment. The inability to share responsibility or recognize the abilities of 
others. Again, you can feel the flavor of the ego coming into this. The ego has always tainted the self in 
this way. This whole business about the inability to share responsibility: this is an individual gate, after 
all, which will take fuel but that does not mean that it is also taking somebody else's telling it where to go. 
It will not. The 2.5, even though it gets projected on that it is the one that knows the way, the moment that 
it refuses to take you, it gets projected on that it does not know the way or that the way it does know is the 
wrong way. This is the other side of the coin. 

In the white book: Higher knowing as an exclusively individual and selfish process. What happens to 
these detriment people is that everybody is projecting on them that they have the direction and they push 
everybody away because they do not want to be interfered with and they keep their direction for 
themselves. "You are going up into the mountains? Can I join you?" "No, I don't want you to tell me 
which way to go up the mountain. Do not dare to tell me. I am smart enough to go up into the mountains 
with somebody who is giving me the energy, but is not going to bug me. If I don't have it myself, I'll wait 
for a transit to get the fuel." 

The 2.5 is always projected on that they have the direction and that they should be the driver. If you have 
a party and a couple of people are drunk, it is the 2.5 that everybody goes over to and says, "Could you 
drive them home?" Others think that the 2.5's know where these people live. If you are lost on a street and 
you end up asking somebody for direction, the person you think is the one that can tell you the way, 
whether or not they really can tell you, is probably a 2.5. You have this sense of, "Ahal They know the 
way." They may or may not. If they do, you think they are wonderful and their reputation grows. If not, 
they run into problems. 

If you project on them that they know the way and they get involved with the ego in that, they also run 
into problems. Individuality is not here to be best. Individuals go to hell the moment they try to be best at 
anything. 

There is only individual connection of the ego that goes directly into the self, in order to be worked out in 
that case. It is one of the things about projection and the confusion between the self and the ego always to 
keep in mind. These people that get projected on, it is not because they know the direction. They are the 
direction. If you have the second gate, you are the direction. 

2.6 Fixation 

Sixth lines are always different than their hexagram because they are outside of the process. Here you 
have a line called Fixation with an overview that says: Unable or unwilling to see the whole picture. The 
first thing to recognize about this is that all sixth lines are desperate to see the whole picture. That is what 
a sixth line is all about. It sits on the roof and tries to get the best perspective that it possibly can to take 
everything in, and here is this sixth line and we have: unable, unwilling, to see the whole picture. Think 
about what mutation is all about. We absolutely must have mutation. It is essential for our evolutionary 
process. Society, humanity, the totality is dependent on direction, on this mutative force and then you 
have these sixth lines that do not want to mutate. Their not wanting to mutate is not of benefit to the 
totality; however, this is not about moral distinction. It is negative in this sense. That is why the negative 
is there. It is negative because it is denying mutative possibilities. 

Think about the 24.6 which is about the possibility of being deaf when opportunity knocks. This is very 
true of the 2.6. In other words, it is unable to see the whole picture, so it is not ready to mutate and, as 
such, may miss the opportunity for mutation and direction in its life. These people don't seem to be going 
anywhere, at least, not to themselves. 

Mercury exalted. Less negative, though the intellect becomes absorbed in constant rationalization. I put 
you back to the 24.6 because it is the language of it. It takes you into what that process is all about: the 
possibility, literally, of not taking the opportunity to mutate because, if you are the 2.6 sitting there on top 
of the roof, you don't really see all the different roads that could be driven because you are limited in that 
way. 

In the Saturn in detriment: The need for security may distort awareness to its ultimate perversion, 
destructiveness. This line is rarely understood. It resonates deeply with the 28.6, which is also part of the 
individual process: Blaze of glory, also a sixth line. 

Remember, our theme throughout this hexagram is the conflict between the exalted self and the ego in 
detriment. This is not about good or bad. That is simply the conflict that is inherent there. What happens 
in this part is that, unable to see or unwilling to see the whole picture, they get fixed, and what they get 
fixed on is mundane direction. They get fixed on dealing with what is on the other side (the 14), which is 
all about security and making money and bringing rewards into your life because the 14 is all about 
resources. It is about filling up your wagon. So, what happens to the 2.6 is that they get fixed on the 
mundane and in doing so, everything becomes their ego and, in that, becomes destructive of them. They 
don't mutate and, because of that, they go through all kinds of problems and they suffer because it is not 
up to their ego in that sense. 

In the white book: Higher knowing that is extremely narrow in its receptivity. Even at the exalted level, 
chances are that you are not going to get mutation out of these forces but, as withh all sixth lines, it is 
possible. Like all sixth lines, there is the possibility to come down from the roof the moment there really 

is something that is of value, and the moment that one can see from that sixth line perspective that 
fulfillment can take place, whatever the circuitry dictates. 

Individual circuitry, the knowing, centering and integration circuits, is enormously complex. In order for 
that 2.6 to decide on a direction, it has to deal with that whole circuitry. It is vast and so, it is deeply 
limited in that sense. However, the mutations that do come out of the 2.6 are very powerful because they 
are very selective mutations. They can be good for us and bad. 

The joke is that before the 2.1, is the 24.6. In other words, the individuality in the 24.6 leads to the 2.1, 
and when you get to the 2.6, this leads to the 23.1, Prose !ytization, which is about the ability to explain 
yourself. That is why you have the limitation here. The limitation is this sense of, "Wow, it is not just a 
direction. It is that I have to be able to explain the direction," and this is very difficult because this is 
always the dilemma for the individual process, to be able to explain knowing. The 2.6 is looking out and 
saying, "Oh, boy. I have to explain this because otherwise, I will not get other people onto this direction 
and if I can't get them onto this direction, it is not mutative and it will not work. " 

That is why the 2.6 is rationalizing. That is why intellect is mentioned in this line. The mind is constantly 
trying to figure out: what is a direction that I can actually explain? Because that really is the key. 

HEXAGRAM 3 - DIFFICULTY AT THE BEGINNING 

The 3rd gate is an extraordinary gate. It is called Difficulty at the Beginning. In the black book, it says: 
The fundamental challenge of initiation is to transcend confusion and establish order. If you want a good 
meditation, think about that for half of your life. This is life itself: to transcend confusion and to establish 
order. We are so busy establishing order on this planet. This is what we have been doing from the 
beginning and we are getting faster and faster at hooking up this order throughout the entire global 
village. The third hexagram speaks for this intrinsic process of life itself. Life itself is to transcend 
confusion. What this is saying to all of us is that there is nothing wrong with life being confusing. Life is 
confusion. 

The longer I live, the more I realize how long you have to live to come to grips with the confusion of life. 
The confusion is not the enemy This is so important to understand. Confusion is natural before mutation 
can take place. Out of confusion comes this mutation. Out of this transcendence comes a new order which 
is not simply a new regulation or a new controlling. It is a new order in the sense that the 3rd gate 
represents the potential for genetic mutation in life. These are children that come into the world with new 
genetic combinations. 

As we globalize our planet, we also globalize our mating process. We have been mixing genes from all 
over the planet. All kinds of interrelationships in the 20th century have brought out a whole new mix in 
the genetic pool. This also represents a new order in genetic material because it is our ongoing 
responsibility as a species to survive through genetic diversity. The third gate speaks for this process of 
life. The essence of life is confusing but the purpose of all that is to transcend the confusion and establish 
the order. 

People who come to Human Design always come in a state of confusion. They come in the obvious state 
of confusion which means they are not being able to make sense out of, understand or know what it is to 
be themselves and why they live the life that they do. All confusion that we experience as humanity can 
be transcended and order can be found, but that is a process that we have to go through. I remind students 
of the Oracle of Delphi. Written over the oracle was this wonderful inscription: 'Know Thyself. This is 
the primary function. Life itself is not confusing but being alive in the world as a human is confusing. 

3.1 Synthesis 

The third hexagram is about the generation of life itself. It is about what literally brings us into the world. 
As such, the first line lays a foundation for what it is to be in the world. If you have the 3.1 and you are 
really introspective, the first thing that you know is that you are confused. What do you do about it? 
Nothing, because you know that, somewhere down the line, life will explain itself to you. If you have the 
first line and you don't know that you are confused, then you are really confused. You think you really 
know what is going on and everything breaks down in your face. 

This is the nature of this first line. It speaks for our whole life process. Recognize that we all come into 
this life confused and we go through most of it confused. In most of those situations, if we are psychically 
healthy, the confusions in our life will be resolved naturally, as a way. That is what we are here for. We 
are great ordering creatures. We do manage to make sense out of things in the end, even if it is a lie. But 
the moment that you do not accept that confusion is natural, that the way is not your way to control, that 
is the moment that deep confusion comes in and the sense of, "Where is the way?" 

3.2 Immaturity 

When you get to the second line, you get to Immaturity. The first line spends all its time involved in the 
introspection of saying, "I have confused energy," and the second line projects that out to everybody else. 
Everybody looks at the 3.2 and they say, "Aren't they confused? They do not know where they are going." 
That brings all kinds of people who say, "You shouldn't do that. You should do that." The 3.2 does not 
know its depth. The second line does not look inwards and it does not know that it is truly confused. It 
just puts out the confused, immature impression and then people come and say, "You poor thing. Let me 
show you the way." 

The 3rd gate is very confusing. The moment that you are confused and someone else shows you the way, 
you get even more confused because you are being shown the way by someone who is just as confused as 
you are. The unrsstrained acceptance of guidance. 

They do not know where they are going. They do not have the depth to understand that it is okay that you 
do not know where you are going. It is not up to you where you go. Our whole process is not about what 
we do. It is about what happens to us the moment we let go off trying to control our confusion. The 
moment we try to hammer our confusion into some kind of order is the moment that we get deeply 
confused. Life has a way. Human beings do not recognize how wonderful they are, how clever and 
adaptable they are. How much they learn in a lifetime. How what they learn is exactly for their confusion 
so that they can finally have order in their life. 

The second line has Mars exalted. The moment you see Mars heading a line, you know that this is a line 
that always reflects a built-in immaturity. Mars is a twelve or fourteen year old child. They can be 
delicious some days and they can be absolute monsters the next day. The unrelenting energy for growth 
will eventually triumph. Again, one side of this process is saying: check out all the guides. Listen to all 
the teachers and gurus. Eventually, you will find your order anyway and you will resent all these people 
and what they tried to tell you. 

On the other side, the Uranus in detriment: Internal instability which both accepts and rejects authority 
simultaneously. We all live with these dichotomies in lines. Even if you have a planet fixing one side, you 
will meet the energy on the other side. 

In the white book: The energy and potential for individual mutation. That is, mutation after the 3.2 has 
gone through this deeply confusing process of being guided by others and finally finding its own order. 
The whole thing about the lower trigram is that it does not really want to deal with the other. The second 
line is just a projection that it is putting out. It does not really want to deal with what it will end up 
dealing with and then it gets very confused. 

Energy and potential that is conditioned by others, leading to instability. "Do this! You are doing the 
wrong thing. Put your energy in this and not in that." All second lines end up in this dilemma of calling 
others to them to tell them. They are putting out a projection and that projection is being met by what they 
are not prepared to meet. The moment that the second line puts out the projection, "I am confused," it 
really does not know what it is confused about. It does not know that it is projecting out confusion. It is 
getting people coming up to them and telling them, "You are confused," and they are astonished. "You 
are going in the wrong direction. Don't you see?" "No." They immediately pull people who take them and 
try to control the direction of their mutation. 

3.3 Survival 

The most volatile and mutative of all lines is the 3.3. Those mutations can be devastatingly bad and they 
can be wonderful. It is called Survival. You will notice that in the third line, Pluto is in detriment. Pluto 
has not been in the 3rd gate for over 150 years, although it will eventually, some time about 2020, reach 

the 60th hexagram on the other side. Very important to keep that in mind when you take a look at this line 
because we are living in a time in which only the positive attributes of evolutionary mutation are at work 
for us. We will get to a point where there will be a negative field of mutation that will affect the whole 
planet, particularly, the children that will be born under the configuration when Pluto enters the 60. 

An innate knowing of what is sterile and fertile, where the mutation is specifically biological and 
dependant on collaboration with others. In other words, how to come from a state of confusion (after all, 
every line of this gate is about being confused) to the recognition of what is fertile and what is sterile. The 
way we do that is the way the third line works: trial and error. Some things will be positively or 
negatively mutative and some things won't be. Trial and error is built into survival. 

Venus exalted. In reproduction, the ability to choose the best mate. By the way, that does not mean the 
best lover or the best friend or partner or person to be in your life. It just means the one who is going to 
help you to produce the mutation in the child that you are having. Don't get carried away with that line. It 
is not about choosing the best mate as your partner for life. It is about being best productively, in that 
sense. 

Pluto in detriment. The perverse denial of evolutionary standards. We do not have that. That is a recessive 
gene: all kinds of things that have a negative, mutative impact on us. Again, what you are looking at is 
this fulfillment. This is the end of the lower trigram after all. It does have its depth and projection, but it 
also has the capacity to adapt and remember. All third lines have this sense that, even though they are 
stuck within their own gate, there is something out there at the other end of the channel. They do not 
really know whatit is; they are not the fourth line. But they do know something about that because they 
are forced to adapt through trial and error. 

The third line is where the trial and error comes in. One thing to understand about going through this 
survival process is that, in order to survive confusion, you have to be willing to make those mistakes. You 
have to be ready to try different things because trial and error is built into it. 

An innate contrariness which refuses to mutate. When Pluto comes to the 60th hexagram, we will have a 
whole generation of people who come and provide us with no new mutative material. This is a generation 
that will be a blind end when it comes to reproduction. It will have difficulties in reproduction. 

The nature of the third line is that confusion is something that we can transcend through trial and error. 
All third lines have within them this ability to make mistakes and survive. That is the person that has four 
children with four different lovers and one of them is really great. It finally got it right. It got the genetic 
material it needed. "Now I have the order that I really needed in my life. The other three, well...?" By the 
way, politicians are born to the 3's. It is perfect for them. 

3.4 Charisma 

When you come to the fourth line, you come to another process. We move into the upper trigram. In the 
fourth line we are talking about something that is deeply aware of the fact that there is something else at 
the other end of the channel and that it no longer is involved in its own process but has an integrated 
process with other forces. This fourth line is called Charisma. Think about the channel of Charisma, the 
channel 20/34 in the integration network. If you see that in a chart where it is not connected to an 
awareness, you know that these are people that deeply need guidance in their life. The most charismatic 
people have, standing behind the curtain, someone who takes most of the money, most of the power, and 
does not do the front job which is done by the 20/34. Their charisma goes out in the world and the people 
in the back count all the money. 

By its very nature, Charisma is about being guided. Everything about the 3rd hexagram is about living out 
the natural confusion of life. No matter what line you are dealing with, on one side is a way of living out 
that confusion to find what works and the other side is all about being even more confused by thinking 
that you can find a way out of the confusion, instead of just letting that natural process happen. 

Innate quality which attracts valued guidance. These people are focused on being confused. That is their 
charisma. After all, they have a one -track-mind. If you look at the 18.4, The Incompetent, you see that 
they are not capable themselves of solving the confusion because they are not designed to. They are 
designed to have someone else do it for them, legitimately. After all, they are looking to the other side of 
the channel. It is a totally different process. They are looking across for someone to give them guidance. 
They are looking to the 60th hexagram to root them in the stable order of what is past, in order to see the 
movement of what is new. They are looking for the other side. 

By doing so, they attract Neptune exalted. Psychic attunement that magnetizes nurturing. When you see 
Neptune in a line, you know that you know nothing about any of it. Neptune is veiling everything. 
Someone says, "You just pulled me in," and they say, "Did I really do that?" They have no idea of that 
psychic magnetizing of others. That is pouring out of the Neptunian veil and they do not know. But 
underneath that fourth line, it is going back to its resonance in the first line. The first line knows: "Let's 
wait long enough. Life will solve our confusion." Here, the 4 says, "Not only do I know that, but that is 
what I will project out with all my might: I am confusedl" Immediately there is someone who shows them 
the way. 

On the other side: Mars in detriment, where the demands of ego lead to rejection. To this kind of people 
you say, "I know exactly what your problem is. All you have to do is...," and they look at you and say, "I 
am confused." The other person repeats the advice and they still say, "I am confused." They are totally 
wrapped up in their confusion. They may come to you for guidance because they externalize that 
confusion and you are there saying, "Oh, I can help you," and then you get mad at them because they do 
not listen to what you tell them. No matter what problem these people have, if you come with a solution, 
they still say that they are confused. This is their energy. This is the fixed way that it moves out. 

Please understand the nature of guidance. What it is saying about life itself is that, not only is life a 
confusing ordeal for us because we need to transcend the confusion to find order, but it is exceedingly 
difficult to do it alone. One of the terminologies that exist in the world that I am most uncomfortable with 
is this assumption and vanity that human beings have: the idea of having an individual karma, "v do not. 
There will not be any mutation unless there is a whole chain of mutative forces that are at work. 

At the highest level, once we go through the lower trigram process of saying, "I am confused," we finally 
get to the upper trigram process that says, "I am confused but, not only will there eventually be order, but 
I will find that order through others." In this sense, they are being guided. The worst scenario for these 
people is someone who has this line and a defined ego. "I am confused, but so what? I will continue to be 
confused my way. You are not straightening me. 

3.5 Victimization 

The fifth line has this delicious name Victimization. Remember the nature of its resonance to the second 
line that projects out, "I am confused." When you get to the fifth line, you have other people who project 
on the fifth line and say, "That one is confused." The fifth line may or may not be confused. They may 
have already transcended the confusion and be totally in order. The other side is looking at them and says, 
"Ahal They are confused. I am going to guide them and take advantage of them." The moment that the 
outside force is guiding the fifth line, the victimization is always possible. 

Remember, the fifth line is not necessarily confused. It just receives that projection. It is like a child that 
goes home to his parents as an adult and the parents are still seeing the child. They do not see the mature 
adult. It is not possible for them. The fifth line is always getting that kind of projection. They are always 
being seen as being confused, whether they are or not. 

As an overview line it says: When actions designed to overcome confusion alienate others. "I am not 
confused, let me show you." "Yes, you are." That is confused. There is no way that they can convince the 
others that are projecting on them. "Mom, I am no longer a child, I am a big boy now.' VOh, no, you are 
still my baby.' No way to escape that. 

Mars exalted. The courage to stand by one's convictions. Very immature, to deny that projection to live 
out the nature. "I am not victimized." Underneath that: The Earth in detriment, where victimization leads 
to appeasement and suffering. These people do not necessarily need to be guided. After all, they are there 
as a universalizing principle. It is one of the things that we see as a completing process in this hexagram, 
that so many 3rd gate people are victimized, that confusion gets victimized and projected on from the 
outside because people think that confusion is bad. Our logical process, which is very different from this 
individual process, says that order is something that we can establish: "Here are the guidelines logically; 
being confused is not necessary. Come over here and I will show you how not to be confused." The 
collective gives confusion a dirty name because it loves to be moralistic. "Confusion is bad and order is 
good. Four legs good, two legs bad." What happens to us planetary- wise is that there is this enormous 
pressure placed on confusion that it must be resolved. 

I have so many people that come to me with undefined G centers who have been literally ripped apart by 
people who said, "You must know who you are." They became the victims in that kind of imposition of 
someone else's guidance through lack of awareness, through lack of recognition of their own nature. Keep 
in mind that the fifth lines represent the universalization of a hexagram. The universalization of confusion 
in our world is victimization. If you are confused, someone is going to pick on you. If you are confused, 
someone will try to use you. Confusion is not bad. It is life. It will go away, I promise. 

The unique energy of individuality to withstand confusion; and Confused energy which is dominated by 
the ordering power of others. The integrity of the individual speaks here: the integrity to follow your own 
convictions despite the projections of others. The integrity of the individual is that it recognizes that 
confusion is okay. It is about accepting this. 

Every hexagram speaks for all of us. '% cannot avoid these things; they are in the world. The moment that 
you are victimized when you are confused is the moment that you are at risk. That is the moment that you 
have given up on the recognition that life itself is the great organizer of things. That is why, for me, this 
hexagram begins the wheel because it begins this process of recognition. There is no way that we will 
figure things out right away. They all take time and the whole life process is a constant movement 
through states of confusion until we reach a point of clarity. 

Whenever you look at the first and fifth lines you see the whole story. The first line tells you the deepest 
truth of what a hexagram is. The fifth line tells you how the world sees it. The world sees confusion as an 
opportunity for victimization. By the way, the positive attribute of that is what we call public education. 
"Let's straighten all these people out. Let's show them the order. Teach them the ABC's. Teach them how 
to be good, moral, orderly creatures and make sure they do not cross the street against the light." W a 
ingrain that in everybody as a result of this being the universalizing symbol of what it is to be confused. 
Confusion has a bad name. 

3.6 Surrender 

With the sixth line, you get to the roof. There you have a different movie because it is not really part of 
the hexagram anymore.' It has all of that process inherent in it. It knows all of those steps. All of those 
things are there, even if it is not really in touch with them. They are built into the nature of the sixth line. 
It has a beautiful name: Surrender. We start with synthesis and end with surrender. This is the nature of 
what it is to live in a confusing body, in a confusing world. Surrender. It is not up to us to dictate the 
nature of the solution. Ordering comes of itself. 

Please remember that the sacral center is not aware. It is a very hot and sweet, dumb machine. It is just 
doing its job. It is just putting out an energy force, an energy field. There is no awareness attached to that. 
In this energy itself lies this wonder of surrender. There is a genetic switch in us that says, okay, let it be. 
The ultimate maturity to recognize when struggle is futile. Don't fight. "Why should I do anything about 
my confusion," says the sixth line. "It is okay with me. Do you have a problem? I don't mind being 
confused. If you think that I am confused, it is okay with me." 

The sixth line does not have to do anything. It is interested in the whole circuit and the whole 
individuality circuit is enormously complex. Its final stage is to bring about a viable mutation for all of 
humanity. That is not likely to happen every two or three seconds. There are so many people with this line 
who say, "Why should I do anything about this confusion when I will have that confusion tomorrow. I am 
still confused. This is not solving anything for me. Let me just be confused. I do not want to mutate. I am 
not ready to mutate. I don't care about mutation unless I can really see that it is possible. Can it really 
happen? Otherwise I will stand back here and do nothing and vibrate with my sixth line." 

Sun exalted. As its light sustains, so life goes on. This voice says, "The sun is still shining. I will 
eventually find my order. 

I will not struggle in this life." I meet this all the time. I am very existential and I live with my awareness 
in the now and I am quite pleased to see that life just happens. 

We had a client a couple of weeks ago in Munich. It was a woman who, by her very genetic structure, was 
inhibited from being able to conceptualize at any sophisticated level, somebody who is restricted to just 
being a child. She was 62 years old and looked 19. She had the mind of a twelve year old. She was a nice 
human being but just very immature. She realized, after living in the world this long, that there is 
something else, but didn't quite know what that was. She wanted me to tell her how to fix it. I told her, 
"look, all you have to do is to let your life happen." There is no way that she could have understood that. 

We come into this plane of existence, into a plane of confusion, and it takes enormous courage to let it all 
just happen. Over and over again in my work I show people, "Look, it is simple. This is what you are. 
You cannot change it. It is neither good nor bad. Life will happen to you and you vibrate in that process in 
response." It is simply a fact. It is just the way it works. 

The sacral is not an awareness center. Fear lies in all awareness. Fear is awareness. There is no fear in the 
sacral center. It is not afraid of surrender. It does not really know what that means. It just knows that it 
does not have the energy to fight to get through a particular confusion when it is not the complete thing. 
Those people won't believe in any order unless that order is an absolute and you can prove it over and 
over again. Otherwise, it is not worth the trouble. Why should I go to that therapist when I know damn 
well that they are not able to solve my problem anyway? The innate acceptance that ordering is a process, 
not a problem. 

Please notice Pluto in detriment. It has never been there in our lifetime. It will come about 2023. The 
overwhelming power of confused energy can lead to depression. The sixth line is not like the rest of the 
hexagram. It is looking far beyond that process and in the Plutonic darkness, it can feel enormously 

depressed about the nature of the world. Remember that it is not active yet. In our world, we are very 
fortunate. In the time that we live and in the children that are born into this cycle with Neptune in 60, all 
these children are coming in with this mutative potential to surrender. It is there in us. This gate is about 
what life is. It is the essence of life. Life begins with confusion and when you get to the end of the 
process, your ultimate maturity is simply to accept: there is nothing that you can do about anything. Let it 
just happen. Very difficult for human beings. 

One last thing: if you look at the 3.6, the next hexagram is the 27. It is in the sacral center. It is about 
nourishment and caring and the first line of the 27 is about being selfish. With surrender comes the 
recognition of what it is to really be surrendered to the confusion. The next step is to look after yourself, 
care for yourself. That is the lesson after the sixth line. 

HEXAGRAM 4: YOUTHFUL FOLLY 

We come to the logical collective. The experience of the abstract side is always going from the 
present to the past, and the experience of the individual process is the dealing with the present. 
When we come to the logic process, there is the need to project into the future. Everything 
about the logic process is about finding a way in which we can be secure in the nature of the 
direction that we take in our lives so that humanity can be preserved. 

The 4 th hexagram is the need to be able to provide a solution that can be experimented with, to 
guarantee the perfection of the human process. Logic is universal in all life forms and so the 
logical mind is of enormous value to humanity It is the only part of the mind that directly asks 
questions and gives answers. The 4 th hexagram is called Youthful Folly. The question is 
coming from the 63, the gate of doubt, and what we have here is the channel of Logic, a design 
of mental ease mixed with doubt. 

The 4 th gate is the gate of formulization and the potential is the awareness to judge what is 
suspicious in the pattern or not. It is concentration on the pattern to come up with the answer. 
The question is: "Is it suspicious, or not?" The answer is about answering the question about the 
pattern. Everything about the logical process is about patterns. The doubt is always initiated by 
a pattern. The answer always has to do with whether that pattern is worthy of doubt. 

Remember the nature of the 18 th gate in the correction process. The 4 th gate, like the 18 th gate, 
has a gift. The 1 8 th gate has the ability to be able to recognize at any given moment what needs 
to be corrected. The 4 th gate has the gift of always being able to come up with an answer. Both 
of those are risky things because what can be corrected at any given moment and an answer 
that can be provided at any given moment is not necessarily the truth, nor is it necessarily 
something that will prove to be of value to humanity once it has been tested and experimented 
with. One always has to be deeply suspicious of logical answers. Answers are the beginning of 
a process. They are the generation of a formula. The 4th gate is the gate of formulization. An 
answer is a formula. The formula is: it is suspicious, or not. 

It says above the lines: The energy to beguile and succeed despite ignorance. Freedom 

from retribution. I am reminded of Groucho Marx, whom I love very much. A waiter came up to 
him and asked him, "How did you find your steak?" "Beside the tomatoes and underneath the 
lettuce." The capacity to come up with an answer has nothing to do with the truth. It is a gift to 
answer. I know; I have the fourth gate. It does not mean that it is the truth, and this is so 
important to understand. It can only be the truth after it has been tested and experimented with. 
It does not matter how clever the answer is. The fact of the matter is that, for the benefit of 
humanity, everything that is logical has to be tested and experimented with. The answer is only 
the beginning of a process. 

4.1 Pleasure 

The first line is always the foundation and it is introspection. The first line is called Pleasure. 
Understand, that that the whole thing about answers is that they are pleasurable. There is a 
pleasure in getting answers. That is why logic has to be seductive for us. It is necessary. It 
brings us pleasure to have answers. 

Ultimate pleasure cannot be achieved without perfect timing. To give an answer at the wrong 
time can be disastrous. People have to be ready for that. Moon exalted. The instinct to know the 
right moment and circumstances where pleasure is rewarded and not punished. You can give 

an answer at one time and have a very angry response. You give an answer at another time 
and everybody is happy. The same is true for correction. One moment you offer to correct 
somebody and they think that you are bitching and the next moment the very same thing can be 
accepted as being valuable. It is a matter of knowing what the timing is. 

Earth in detriment. Timing is not a product of discipline. Exaggerated self-discipline leads to the 
abuse of pleasure. The most important thing about people who have the fourth gate is that they 
don't decide the timing. They are ready for the right time. 

The potential to recognize that there is a natural timing to the understanding process. It is not 
about deciding the timing; it is about being ready for the right time. It is there, it comes. It is 
collective. In order for an answer to be valid, it still has to become an opinion. It still has to get 
its details. It still has to be experimented with. It has to go through that whole process. 

The other side is: The potential to recognize but the urge to force the timing. People who have 
this detriment always want to give you the answer at the wrong time. You are busy and they 
have the answer and they won't let you do your thing. They have to give you the answer when 
you do not appreciate it, and then it does not get shared properly. The first line knows very little 
about the other side. The key in all of this is to recognize the nature of timing, to be ready in the 
understanding and then you do not get punished. 

4.2 Acceptance 

Here, we get to the line of projection and we know with the projection that there is no 
introspection in that process. The introspection is all about timing. When you go to the tantric 
channel of this, you get to the 15/5. You get to being in the flow; you get to the Rhythm. You get 
to the timing mechanism. Timing is at the core of giving answers. When you get to the second 
line, the projection line, there is no introspection to recognize the nature of the timing. 

The line of Acceptance. The recognition of limitation in oneself and others leads to tolerance 
and the suspension of judgment. Moon exalted. The glorification of feelings. The mother which 
always pardons the errant child. Mars in detriment. The assertion of the ego at the expense of 
others' failures. 

In the white book, the Moon exalted. The potential to recognize that not everyone can 
understand. The first thing that happens to the person that is projecting out their answer and not 
being aware of the timing is that they project out their answer and other people just don't get it. 
They are not ready for it. It is not the right time. It is not the right moment. It is not the right 
place. Because of that, they have the sense of "They don't understand me. Why don't they 
understand me?" Then there is this sense of "Maybe they will. It is too bad that they do not 
understand." There is this sense of "Poor them. I have to be patient with them," instead of 
realizing that it is simply coming at the wrong time. 

The other side is: The potential to take advantage of the lack of understanding in others. Here 
we have the ability to see very clearly in the projection that the others do not understand. "If 
they don't understand I will take advantage of the understanding." In other words, "If they don't 
get it, I won't share it with them. I'll just do it myself." Usually, disaster and Terminal disease 
follow. 

4.3 Irresponsibility 

The third line is about adaptation. We get to the end of the trigram. The third line is rooted in the 
wave of bonds made and broken. I have my design Saturn in this line and I know it very well. It 
is called Irresponsibility. I claim it boldly: "I am not responsible." The general refusal to apply 
oneself diligently when one can get by with much loss effort. This is a deep facility to be able to 
come up with answers and give them to other people. 

Venus exalted. Where art is more valued than the artist. Understanding and collecting answers 
was something for me that I did, but I never applied them to my life. I just collected answers. 
That's all. It did not make any difference to me what it would mean to me personally. I was just 
collecting answers because that is what the 4.3 can do. 

Pluto in detriment. The rationalization of irresponsibility as an act of refocalization. They need to 
collect these answers for whatever reason. 

The potential to enjoy the formulas with no regard to their practical application. None. It is just a 
matter of having answers. The other side of this is: The potential to justify such a process in 
order to maintain it, which is a lovely thing to do. I have been doing that all of my life. 
Fortunately, now I do something with them. It is a very funny trait. 

4.4 The Liar 

We reach the upper trigram and get to the resonance of the first line, the Pleasure and the 
timing process. Here you have The Liar. Role playing as an art form. The actor. 

Sun exalted. Fantasy protects and nurtures a sense of purpose and reason, no matter how 
misguided. Saturn in detriment. Time always brings humiliation. Here, time is mentioned again. 
You play the game of having the answer. Let's say you are sitting in an office and your boss 
walks by and says, "By the way, do you know how to run the 41762 machine?'" and you say, 
"Yes". It is your role to say yes and you play out that role. If you do not really know, you will 
have to find out how it works very quickly from somebody else before the boss says, "Did you 
get it done?" Often, time will bring humiliation. 

This is pretending to understand, which can be wonderful. It can be very artistic. It helps to be 
able to explain an understanding if what you are pretending to understand is really something 
you do understand. 

The potential to find or illustrate the formulas through fantasy. What really happens to these 
people is that they are driven (Youthful Folly, yes, I know) to figure it out. This is their way of 
getting to understand. First they lie and then they run like hell to catch up with their lie. Every 
once in a while they get caught up in the game. 

The other side is: The potential danger to see the fantasy as fact. This is because the moment 
you say, "I know how to run the 41762 machine," and the boss says, "Okay, show me," you are 
in big trouble. 

4.5 Seduction 

Here we come to a real key to the nature of what the whole logical process is about. The fifth 
line is a line of universalization and the fifth line wave has to do with the nature of seduction. 
This fifth line is called Seduction. It is one of the things to recognize about the nature of the logic 
system (and I can't repeat it too often) that you have three gates of the logic system in the 

throat. The 62nd, the 31 st and the 16th gate are not pointed towards a motor. It is enormously 
difficult for logic to find its energy. One of the keys to that is the capacity to be able to seduce 
that energy. "Would you please finance my experiment?" That is a very difficult thing to do in 
this world. There are millions and millions of people trying to get somebody to finance their 
experiment so that they can prove something and bring their solution. 

The nature of seduction in terms of the logic process is the universalizing element of answers. 
An answer that has universal potential is deeply seductive. When you are looking at these fifth 
lines of potential, I hope you get the image of them that they are deeply spiritual or religious. We 
saw the fifth line, The Saint, in the abstract process, The Confessor in the individual process, 
and here you come to The Seducer. Remember, at the other end, you have a black magic gate 
in the same circuit. The seduction is: "I have an answer for you but you have to provide me with 
some energy, and then I will give it to you." 

Allowing others to assume responsibility as a shield against potential punishment. You have to 
get them to understand so that they will take the chance with the experiment, so that they will 
bring the energy to it. More than any other of those lines, this line recognizes that the answer 
will only work if there is energy. 

Jupiter exalted. Unearned reward and recognition. Pluto in detriment. A life of lip service to 
antiquated and unsatisfying values. Cynicism. This is the cynicism that says, "I am the one that 
has the answer, and I have to go around seducing people to try to get the energy." What I call 
the money lenders. You have to go out into this world. I can remember, in the days before my 
work was published, what it was like to go to publishers and have them laugh at me. They told 
me that I was just bananas. 

The potential to succeed through the understanding of others. Logic is a collective process and 
it is about sharing, and it is deeply important to understand others. Again, it goes back to the 1 
8th gate and the resonance to that other potential that is about human rights. It is about 
recognizing that the real answer for humanity is very important. 

The potential for cynicism that comes with always having to acknowledge the understanding of 
others. They have to 

understand you in order that you can get your understanding out. These people can be very 
bitter. The dull thing is when it stops there at the 4th gate because whoever gets it to the throat 
gets all the credit. Whoever speaks the voice of that opinion in detail is the one that gets the 
credit and not the seducer in the 4th. Those who speak it in the throat and the understanding is 
refuted is the one that gets punished, not the seducer. 

4.6 Excess 

Here you get to the sixth line, to the roof of the house and this line of transition. This is actually a 
very fascinating line because these people do want to understand. They are not interested in 
answers. They know how easy answers are. They are very aware of that. They tend to be 
people who, for example, as students have an enormous difficulty learning this. They have 
difficulties in bothering to understand at all. They are looking for something else. They are 
looking for the next line which is the 29.1 , The Abysmal, the gate of saying yes, and the gate of 
making a commitment to a process. It is actually making a commitment to life itself. These 
people say, "The answer does not matter but life matters. I do not care what your guru says. I 
am happy chopping wood." Life matters. 

The line is called Excess. Repeated and conscious abuse of norms will not escape discipline. In 
refusing to pay any attention to your answers, you can end up in situations where understanding 
is the only thing that will save you, and you will get punished because you are not ready. You 
haven't been open to understanding. 

Mercury exalted. The development through experience of techniques to apply self-restraint. 
These people do not offer you their answers. They are looking for something else. They are 
looking for life itself. It is not the answer they are seeking out. The answer doesn't mean 
anything to them. For them it is just purely intellectual and these are of course very intellectual 
gates. They are not about what you do. They are just about coming up with formulas and the 
sixth line knows that. That answer is not what life is about. Life is life. 

The other side of this has Mars in detriment. The gall to accept punishment as the price of 
excess. "Well, I don't want to understand so I am not going to school. I will not be what you think 
I should be. I am more interested in going out and living my life. The answer is not important to 
me." 

In the white book, Mercury exalted. The potential in a logical process to recognize when the 
understanding is not complete and have the patience to wait out the process. The answer does 
not mean anything; only life means something. 

Mars in detriment. Despite recognizing the incompleteness a lack of patience with the process. 
"I can't be bothered with all of this. It is not important to me. Where is my life? Do I have a life?" 
These are people who always wonder whether they have a life. What is very funny about these 
people is that, like the 47.6, they are actually ready to go straight down against the circuit to the 
other side. The 47.6 wants the truth. It is not interested in what makes sense. It is looking to the 
17. Can I get an opinion? Will the facts help me? 

When you come to the 4.6, the logical gate, it is looking for the life. It is looking for an idea. It is 
ready to cross the circuit, to break the circuit and jump over to the other side. They are both 
collective, after all, and mirrors of each other. So at the end of their process, they are both 
looking at each other. One wants to be a believer and one wants to understand. It is quite a nice 
joke. 

HEXAGRAM 5 WAITING 

The gate of Waiting. The fundamental attunement to natural rhythms. Waiting as an active state of 
awareness. The channel 5/15 is universal in all forms of life on this planet. Rhythm is the miracle of what 
it is to be alive. Whenever I deal with people that have the 5, 1 tell them the same thing: "Pay attention to 
your life and see what your natural rhythm is, and then fix it. If you discover that every day at four o'clock 
you like to have a siesta and you need that hour of rest because it is important for you, when you 
recognize that it is an important rhythm in your life, fix it and make it a habit, a ritual." Concentration 
needs the proper patterns to work through. The moment you realize that this is your ritual, a natural 
rhythm for you, you are using your energy properly. 

It is so important for 5's to be ritualistic, to recognize their natural rhythms and to fix them. In this form of 
waiting, fixing your natural rhythm is an active state of awareness. It is not awareness but a state. The 
moment that you are following your fixed natural rhythm, anything is possible because the energy is 
right. When the energy is right, anything is possible in the logic process. 

5.1 Perseverance 

The first line always speaks for the essence of a hexagram and the first line is Perseverance. If the captain 
must, he goes down with the ship. Understand what that means: if you notice that every day at four 
o'clock you are fatigued, then you need to rest. You fix this as a ritual in your life. Nobody is allowed to 
telephone you. Nobody is allowed to come and visit you. Nobody is allowed to disturb you. You are in 
your nice apartment building on the 39th floor and, all of a sudden, you hear a fire alarm while you are 
lying there on your sofa during your ritualized, fixed time. If the captain must, he goes down with the 
ship. Don't break your ritual. You may die in the fire, but 99 times out of a hundred you won't. Everybody 
else will have burnt apartments, but you will be fine and they will say, "Why didn't you come out?" You 
answer, "I was just lying down having my nap." 

If the captain must, he goes down with the ship. Don't let anybody interfere with your fixed rhythm and 
your ritual. If you need to eat at 8 o'clock in the morning and your lover says, "I eat at 11 o'clock," let 
your lover eat alone. Eat at 8 o'clock in the morning. This is the nature of this line. 

Mars exalted. Here again, the loveliness of what Mars can be. Courage in the face of adversity. "I am not 
going to respond. I stay here in my ritual no matter what, and nobody will take me out of it." This is the 
power that lies in this fifth gate. 

The Earth in detriment. The premature and often disastrous urge to cut one's losses. This is the moment in 
which, because there is no awareness (we are dealing with energy here), the ritual can be given up. "I will 
leave the apartment. 

It is okay if it burns but I want to save my life." They will die and the apartment won't burn. This is the 
irony of these things. 

The power to maintain one's own rhythm; or Weakness in maintaining one's rhythm when challenged. 
That is why Mars is so powerful in the exalted. Understand the basis of what this hexagram is saying; it is 
so important. No logical process can be a success without a fixed rhythm. You can't just study 24 hours 
and then go and pass an exam. If you study 20 minutes a day for two weeks, you might. You have to 
establish the proper rhythm and fix what works for you. This is what logic demands and it is also what 
leadership demands: rituals. Wte have flags and people who salute. We have all these rituals of state. Wte 
need all these fixed rituals; otherwise, the understanding process does not work. 

5.2 Inner Peace 

The second line has such a nice name, Inner Peace. The second and the fifth line both have Pluto in 
detriment. That Pluto experience is coming up in 2000 to 2002. We will have a lot of children coming 
into the world who will carry this energy deep inside of them, and there is going to be an explosion of 
discomfort out of that. 

Second lines are always projecting outwards. This line is projecting outwards that they have their fixed 
rhythm. "I have my natural fixed rhythm." That is what they are projecting out into the world. It may or 
may not be true. The ability to ignore the temptation to take premature action. These people project 
outwards the ability that they will not take premature action and that they live out their natural rhythm. 
They are projecting out that natural rhythm to others. 

Venus exalted. The gift of maintaining composure through idealizing tranquility. Pluto in detriment. Inner 
peace experienced as stagnation. It may be one thing to say "This is my natural rhythm," but that rhythm 
in itself may not be producing anything. So many people that have the 5 and the 15 have to spend so 
much time in their life doing nothing. This is all about being in the flow. Being in the flow does not mean 
that you are always moving. It means that you move, you rest, you move, you rest.... People who have the 
5 and people who have the 15 go through periods where they can't move; there is nothing to do. They 
suffer because of that and then they run around like crazy and then they suffer because of that. There is 
nothing to do and then they suffer because of that and then. 

In the white book, we have: The power to be comfortable with one's rhythm. This is what is being 
projected outwards: this comfort. Also: The drive for power that is constrained by a fixed rhythm. In the 
moment that the fixed rhythm does not feel good, they do not really know whether that is their natural 
rhythm or if they are living out a projected rhythm which they take for their natural rhythm, but it is 
stagnating because it does not take them anywhere. They do not feel like it is productive and in that 
moment, they may start looking for some other kind of rhythm and break their ritual. "Yes, I used to have 
a nap everyday at four o'clock but one day my apartment was on fire and I ran out." Now, I don't nap 
anymore because it is bad luck. 

They break from what they were projecting as their natural rhythm, and suddenly you find out that is not 
what they are at all. That is the child that says, "Every night from 7 o'clock to 8 o'clock I do my studies." 
One day you go over there and you open the door; you find the window open and they have been gone for 
hours because that fixed rhythm was leading to stagnation. Of course, they don't know underneath 
whether it is really their natural rhythm; there is this temptation to break that and try something else, with 
predictable results. 

5.3 Compulsiveness 

When we get to the third line, it has a very intense name, Compulsiveness. We know that this third line is 
about trial and error. One of the things to recognize about that is everybody who has the 5.3 is always 
convinced that their rhythm is a mistake. If they are lying flat on their back and they cannot move a 
muscle, they are sure that it is a mistake. They are sure that they should do something. If they are running 
around like mad and they cannot stop running around, they are convinced that it is a mistake because they 
are sure that they should be on vacation somewhere, lying flat on their back and doing nothing. They have 
a great deal of difficulty in accepting what their natural rhythm is because there is always this sense that 
there is something wrong with it. 

The fear engendered by the sense of helplessness resulting in unnecessary stress and activity. This sense 
of helplessness: "I have this rhythm and I am stuck with it, and I don't really like it. I want to be able to be 
busy or I am out being busy and I want to rest. I don't really like this." 

Neptune exalted. Compulsiveness can be limited in its negative effects through Nights of imagination. 
This is the best therapy for somebody that has the 5.3. (I hate the word 'therapy; I'd rather say 
'methodology'.) In those moments, where they assume that their fixed rhythm is not correct, that it is a 
mistake. I always tell them the same thing, "Well, imagine what it would be like to do something else." 
This can be deeply imaginative. There is a great power in this: while they are flat on their back, they can 
dream, or while they are running around being busy, they can dream about another fixed rhythm. It is 
better for them to imagine the vacation while they are running around instead of taking it. Better for them 
to imagine being busy when they are lying down instead of doing it. That is much healthier for them. 

Understand that logic requires an enormous amount of imagination. Logic, after all, is rooted in the talent 
process. Without imagination logic can never work. So much of the logic that we process in our lives, we 
process at the imaginative level, making imaginative constructs in our mind to see within our imagination 
whether logic resonates for us, or not. 

This is an opportunity for these people, in that moment of seeing that their rhythm is not correct for them 
or is a mistake, to allow that simply to work out. It is the rhythm. Don't change it, but go in your 
imagination to wherever you want to go. This is the healthy side of this process. 

Underneath is: Unable to surrender and at odds with one's own rhythm. The Moon cannot stand still. 
What happens to these people is that they will constantly break their rhythm, discover that it is not good 
for them either, and they will eventually come back in their process after repeating the mistakes over and 
over again about breaking their rhythm. They will go back to their natural rhythm and they will suffer 
with it. With the third line, there is always inside of it this sense of, "Is this really what it is? Or is this a 
mistake? I don't like this rhythm, I want to change it." 

5.4 The Hunter 

When you get to the upper trigram and you get to the fourth line, this is a line of externalization and we 
know that it is the resonance to the first line, where the captain must go down with the ship. Here you 
have what is called The Hunter. Waiting as a guarantee of survival. Having your natural rhythm or fixing 
your natural rhythm is a guarantee of survival. There are very few guarantees in this life. Here is one. The 
guarantee is that if you live by your fixed rhythm, your natural fixed rhythm, it is a guarantee for survival. 

Uranus exalted. The creative genius to transform the most passive experience into active achievement. 
This goes back to something very basic about understanding how wonderful our form is. It goes back to 
the fact that we don't have to do anything. It is built in. This is genetics, after all. If you are not struggling 
with your own rhythm, not trying to change it, not succumbing to group pressure, this is the opportunity 
for a deep creative process to really see what comes out of you in your natural rhythm because it is you. 
Out of that natural rhythm comes the pure logical process that belongs to you and it is a guarantee that 
you will survive, and not because of somebody else. 

Sun in detriment. The vanity of a personality so strong that, unwilling to hide behind a blind, threatens its 
very survival. This is the other side of the captain that goes down with the ship. This is just cuffing your 
losses and off you go. Remember that this line knows that there is another side. This is not the love of the 
body; this is the love of humanity. "I need to serve humanity," The fourth, fifth and sixth lines of the 5th 
hexagram are there to serve humanity. In that externalization in the fourth line, you have this fixed 
process where it says, "I don't want to wait. I want to serve humanity now. I don't want to accept this 
rhythm." The moment that they don't accept that rhythm, their very survival is threatened. There are so 

many people who, out of impatience and pressure, will break their natural rhythm and try to live another 
rhythm and become very ill. They become unhealthy because it is not for them. 

Illness has its manifestation in many ways. It is not just simply chronic obvious illness. It is deeper: 
psychological things and all kinds of emotional damage that can be done to them and the crushing of the 
ego. All of that has a root in this line. One of the things to recognize about the fourth line is that it really 
needs to be able to express that fixed rhythm as a contribution to the totality, as a contribution to 
humanity. 

The Hunter, in the white book: The power to make the best of one's fixed rhythm. This is the genius. On 
the other side: The drive to deny one's own rhythm with predictable costs. If you go against your own 
rhythm, you will pay a price. Always. By the way, my advice or information for these people with this 
detriment is: they must make sure that there is nobody around them who is trying to pull them away from 
their rhythm because they will succumb. Mechanics protects you by giving you a way to work with that 
mechanical information. 

If you have an aspect that can bring you into a detrimental field which is not healthy for you, you have to 
make sure that there are not those forces around you that will automatically do that. If you have the 21.3 
and you are powerless with superior forces, then don't work for superior forces because you will be 
powerless. If you don't want to be pulled away from your fixed rhythm, because that tendency is always 
in you if you have this detriment, don't allow anybody to do that. Don't allow people around you who do 
not accept your rhythm. Mechanics is a great teacher that way. 

5.5 Joy 

I love this line. It is a lot of fun for me. V know what the fifth line is all about. Wye know that this is 
universalization and we know that everyone who carries the fifth line is going to be projected on. 
Everything about the logic process is about the repetitive process. To repeat over and over again in your 
fixed rhythm, concentrated in order to produce out of that a corrective process to eventually, through 
experimentation, come to a point where after many years, mastery is the result. In the second line, we had 
a projected field of inner peace going out and when we get to the fifth line, we have a projected field 
going onto the fifth line person and that projected field is called Joy. 

It says: Waiting as an aspect of enlightenment. There are only two out of the 384 lines that mention the 
word enlightenment: the 54.4 which is Enlightenment/Endarkenment, which is another thing entirely, but 
here we have the aspect that we call enlightenment. Please understand something: enlightenment is a 
projection of those from the outside onto somebody else. Please understand that. Be very clear about that. 
Be very clear about something else, too: when Pluto comes roaring through into this fifth line and it hits 
the detriment, we are going to have a collapsing of this concept of enlightenment in terms of the nature of 
the so-called Master. Please understand that enlightenment is a projection. It is the outside turning on the 
light and focusing it on somebody else and projecting that light onto them. They may or may not be the 
master of what is being projected onto them, but it can look like that. 

Waiting as an aspect of enlightenment. What they are projecting onto these people is that they have this 
fixed rhythm and, because of that, they seem so calm. The apartment building is burning down and you 
are lying there on the sofa and somebody comes racing in and says, "Don't you hear all these fire alarms? 
This place is burning down," and you look at them very calmly and you say, "Please, don't disturb me. I 
am having my rest. Close the door, will you?" Do you know what that does to your reputation later? They 
say, "That was unbelievable. This one really knew." 

To remain calm as the ultimate aesthetic... This is about beauty. This is not about truth.. ..and thus 
recognize the inner meaning of being. And when you get to that point you should get the joke: Pluto in 
detriment. Joy dismissed as an illusion, waiting as a failure. We will have a huge generation of children 
born with this line. Millions and millions of them will be born in the beginning of this new century 
carrying something that has not been in humanity for 156 years, bringing this energy out. It is the 
beginning of what people call the movement towards Aquarian knowledge, that projection is not enough. 
After all, this is all about logic. 

In the white book: The power to be calm and to find one's place in the flow, or Disillusionment with 
recognizing one's place in the flow. Remember, because it is projected on these people that they are calm 
and at peace within themselves or enlightened, they'd better not make any mistakes. 

I have friends in America who are hosts for me when I tour there. They are guru chasers, so they get a lot 
of masters that come by and stay in their house because that is what they like. The stories that they tell: 
somebody who has that projected field on them and you bring them into your own home and then you 
realize, "Oh, my god. What is this?" Everyone who plays the spiritual master game knows that it is the 
projection coming from the outside and there is this deep fear inside of them, whether they can live up to 
the standard. The key is: you'd better be calm inside. I love this line. 

5.6 Yielding 

When we get to the sixth line, we find a very unusual sixth line here because it has no polarity. We only 
have exaltation, so it is being fixed in a very special way. It is called Yielding. Waiting is never free from 
pressure, physical or mental, and is often punctuated by the unexpected. This takes us back to the irony of 
logical energy: that it is suffused with faith and belief. There is all this faith built in underneath because 
nobody really knows whether the solution can ever be achieved and whether the leadership can ever take 
place. 

It says that 'waiting is never free from pressure' and that it 'is often punctuated by the unexpected'. The 
unexpected is illogical. This can be very disturbing sometimes. "I was doing step one, two, three, four, 
and all of a sudden something happened, something out of context." That 'out of context' allows for the 
unfolding of the whole process. There is always this sense inside, and this makes logical people even 
more determined to find out why the unexpected happened, so that they can make sure that it always fits 
into logic. It is like people who talk about coincidences instead of recognizing geometries. The geometry 
is clear: you know that these things are meeting each other. 

Accepting that in one's fixed rhythm despite the pressures, growth will be empowered, and often through 
the unexpected. Built into it is that through the fixed rhythm there will be growth, but, Neptune exalted. 
The growth of awareness that comes with bending to the universal flow. It is still a sixth line. It does not 
really mean that they are going to give their energy to humanity. They can, but that does not mean that 
they will. Again, they are looking at the whole circuit which means that this line is looking to the 31st 
gate at the end that says "I lead with this formula that we have experimented with and proven. It is a value 
for us and reliable in the future." 

You don't know that in the fifth gate. You can't because it is just an energy. It has no identity. It knows 
that there is much more and because of that, it does not want to give its energy to anything that it cannot 
lead. That is a key for it. In other words, "Will I be really able to take this energy and go down this road. 
Can I actually do it?" 

These are people that are pulled into the flow unexpectedly. They can be standing on the sideline 
watching the river flow and everything is fine and all of a sudden a boat goes by and catches them. 

Unexpectedly, they find themselves in the flow. The logic process: they would love to kidnap all these 
people that have these energy gates for logic and hold on to them and keep them in the cupboard 
somewhere, so that they can really activate this logical process. It is very hard for the 5.6 to escape the 
demands of society. Society comes along and says, "Excuse me. I know that you do not want to get 
involved but we will take you along with us." 

When you look at the logical process, you see that it does not involve the ego. There is no ego in logic. 
When you get to this sixth line, you get to this uncertainty about whether one can really lead or whether 
one can really go through this logical process and get to the solution and be able to do something about it. 
The very next hexagram, the very first line is the 26.1, which is tribal. It says: A bird in the hand. The ego 
has a lesson for logic: be satisfied with what it is that you have and, by the way, if you can't be satisfied 
about it, lie. 

HEXAGRAM 6 CONFLICT 

We have the 6th gate in the channel of Mating, a design focused on reproduction: Conflict, the gate of 
friction. Its energy is the hope and pain wave of intimacy. Its potential is the awareness or, let us put it 
this way, the emotional wave whether to bond or not: the channel of intimacy. Understand how the wave 
works: the wave does not take you from one side of the line to the other. Don't confuse this. The 
emotional wave is not going to take you from the exalted to the detriment and back again. You will get 
that from meeting people who will have planets in those positions and are going to fix you in one end of 
the wave or the other. You have the transits that do that, as in any other process in the chart. The thing to 
recognize about the hope and pain wave, and I will illustrate that to you as we go through the lines, is that 
it operates in each part of the line. There is a hope and pain aspect to every part of these lines, whether we 
call them exalted or in detriment. The exalted will have a hope and pain wave and the detriment will have 
a hope and pain wave. It is not that the wave is going from one to the other. Don't confuse that. 

The 6th gate is the gate of the pH in our biology and this is what establishes the barriers. If you look at the 
heading of the 6th gate in the Rave I'Ching, it says: The fundamental design component of progress. The 
law that growth cannot exist without friction. Remember, the other side, the 50th gate, is tribal law. Here 
in the 6th gate, we have biological law. Life, reproduction, cannot exist without friction, without this gate. 
There are many things in that. The 6th gate is the place where the motor sits. That is the motor that 
generates these six different waves. The thing to keep in mind about the nature of this gate is its mystical 
mystery because this law about growth is rooted in this wave. We would never be in an evolutionary field 
unless we were living in the emotional wave. The emotional wave is what makes the general field fertile 
and that fertility is not just about reproducing children. The emotional field is a fertile field. It can also be 
sterile. That is the other side. 

The 6th gate carries within it this law that growth cannot exist without the motor. That is why, the 
moment somebody has the 6th gate and they step into your life, they dominate your frequency because 
they come with the power of that motor which stimulates growth. By the way, if you are not in resonance 
with that power it may do exactly the opposite. In other words, it can begin a process of decay that leads 
to friction and conflict in the mundane sense. It is very important to see that this gate has enormous 
power. It is a gate of fusion. It fuses feelings, moods and sensitivity, these three streams that move 
through the solar plex center. 

In a sense, what you are really seeing is that out of the 6 and out of its motor come those three streams. 
They are born out of or grow out of this law of the 6th gate. What we call feelings or moods is rooted 
here. The key is that each line that I am about to take you through in the 6th gate resonates with a wave. 
Each line is, in that sense, the fundamental expression of each of these aspects of the wave. I like to think 
of them as six different gears and each of them are expressed in language in each of the lines in the 6th 
gate. 

6.1 Retreat 

We start with the first line. We are talking about the foundation of intimacy, about the line of 
introspection, and it says Retreat. This is one of the first things to recognize about the nature of the 
emotional system: when it comes to intimacy, the very first lesson of this hexagram is to wait. It is about 
retreat. Wait and see. The Realization that wasting one's resources against overwhelming odds is not 
courage but folly. The moment that you step into that role relationship (the 59th gate is the role in which 
you find intimacy) you have to be very clear because you are in the wave. What felt good today can feel 
terrible tomorrow and there is nothing that you can do about that. 

Pluto exalted. The power of regeneration that can embrace retreat as a phase and not as a failure. On the 
other side: The inferiority complex, where retreat is experienced as personal weakness. What we have 
here in the first line is the wave of weakness and strength. This is the nature of all intimacy. This is the 
foundation after all. What has to be examined, what has to be looked into, what the introspection is, is 
into the weakness and the strength. Both of them have to be revealed. One of the things that I remind 
emotional people is that when you meet somebody, tell them, "I am an emotional person. You may not 
like me tomorrow." If they are ready to take a chance and see what you are like tomorrow, everything will 
be a little bit easier in your relationship. But if they discover that themselves, you will get all that wave 
back on you because they are going to mirror that emotional wave. 

The emotional stability to accept conflict. Think about how that emotional stability works with a wave of 
weakness and strength. You can feel weak and in that moment you accept intimacy. It does not mean that 
you are unstable because you are weak. You can be very stable and recognize that you are weak, and you 
need the intimacy to give yourself strength. At the same time, you can have the emotional stability to 
accept intimacy from the strength of your wave. Guess what? You get both because it is the wave. The 
thing to recognize about looking at any aspect of any line in any hexagram in the emotional system is that 
the line is always going to work both ways. It is going to work for both sides of the wave and everything 
in between as it moves through the arc of that wave. So you will always get both sides. If it is fixed, you 
get both sides of the side that is fixed. 

Emotional instability in times of conflict. When you are weak and unstable, you will accept intimacy, or 
when you're strong and unstable, you will accept intimacy. It does not make any difference. It is still 
going to operate in the wave. You will always get both ends. The nature of this first line tells us the most 
important thing about all of our bonding. To recognize so clearly that we, as the byproducts of our 
parents' relationships and all of the children that have ever been brought into the world, have been 
brought into the world ignorantly. We have been brought into the world based on these genetic 
imperatives that are much more powerful than we are. 

The very first step that we can take in lowering the chaos level in the world at the moment is to honor the 
first rule of the law of growth: don't be in such a hurry to create the growth. This law says: better that it is 
a fine tree than a lot of weeds. % it and see where the seed should be planted and when the seed should be 
planted and with whom before one goes out and decides that life is going to end up as a garden. This is 
very important because we do not listen when it comes to our emotions. Emotions make us deaf and 
blind. When it comes to intimacy it can make us deaf and blind and dumb. The first law is, "Wait a 
second. You are very nice. I would have married you yesterday but today I don't feel like it. I wait and 
check it out and I will see." This is the foundation of the house of intimacy. 

6.2 The Guerilla 

When we get to the second line, we get to projection. The projection wave is the wave of advance and 
withdrawal. Remember about the nature of the 6, that it is always looking to the 59. After all, that is the 
other side, the genetic roles that are being played out on the other side. The second line is not 
introspective. It is not looking into the relationship at all. It is not looking into what the nature of intimacy 
is. It is not looking at the weakness and strength. It is just the kamikaze. It is either going into full 
advance or racing back in full withdrawal. It is one or the other. That wave is going to operate on either 
side of the line. 

The Guerilla. Not to be confused with the animal, though sometimes they are similar. The ability to 
maximize an inferior position... because it does not know the nature of intimacy. It hasn't looked into 
what intimacy is. This is why this line can often be non-fertile because it has not looked into the nature of 

intimacy. ...through timely contact and withdrawal. This wave of advance and withdrawal is already built 
into the nature of this line. 

Venus exalted. Aesthetic sensitivity and mental detail can find the weakest point. The ability to advance 
and the built-in wave of withdrawal: the withdrawal always reveals within the beings themselves their 
own weak points, and out of that they learn when to advance against the weak points of others. It is a 
mechanism that teaches them where others are weak emotionally. These are great button pushers. They 
can go exactly to that button and they go, "ding, dong," and the emotional wave rises in that moment out 
of the projected field. 

Mars in detriment. The kamikaze, striking but moot. Kamikaze can be beautiful. These people that lunge 
into relationships like there is no tomorrow. They've taken their oath to the emperor and they dive into 
their relationships blindly, aiming for the heart. They often crash violently. 

In the white book we have: The sensitivity to find the weakest point in a conflict and to exploit it 
emotionally. Understand: that will operate in a wave. Sometimes that sensitivity advances at the weakest 
point. Sometimes the weakest point is to withdraw from it. These people can really withdraw. They can 
project the other away in that sense. In other words, they know when somebody will need them 
emotionally and they can automatically withdraw from it because they know that this is their weakest 
point and that they can't get it then. Or they can project the emotional field in on the other side. 

Underneath: A lack of sensitivity that blunders into conflicts. These relationships are non-productive, but 
at the same time, like all non-productive things, they have a value. It is like my trivia that I keep 
collecting. Eventually, these people are very good in saying, "This is a non-productive relationship," and, 
"That is a non- productive relationship," because they get to see it through the experience. Built into the 6 
is what is built into all these waves: built into that wave is the experiential way. There is an experience in 
all of that that has to be gathered. The difficulty with the 6.2 is that it is always either advancing or 
withdrawing without really grasping the nature of the intimacy. It can be a difficult line, like all second 
lines. 

6.3 Allegiance 

When we get to the third line, we get to the end of the lower trigram. We get to the line of adaptation and 
this line is the first possibility of being able to really meet the other side. This is the end of the lower 
trigram process and, in that, the third line has the introspection and the projection and can be very fertile 
when it makes contact to the other side. The wave of this line is allegiance and rejection. It is making 
bonds and breaking them. This line is called Allegiance. The ability to secure support and create strength 
out of a weak position. When connected to the harmonic gate 59, mating that results in conception. This is 
a deeply fertile line. 

Neptune exalted. The destruction of old forms through union... It is very important to understand this. 
This is bonds made and broken. This is there for genetic continuity because this is a very bad place to try 
to build a stable relationship. This is bonds made and broken. Bonds made and broken is part of the 
genetic strategy that is going to be there in the resonance to the sixth line when you go beyond what 
intimacy is. Here in the third line it is all about the fact that we have to make sure that the gene pool is full 
of the unusual so that we survive whatever future evolution is going to bring us. So, this third line of 
allegiance is about the destruction of old forms through union. It is not bringing in the same old genetic 
material that you always had in your tribe. This is about bringing in something really new, new blood, 
new information. Usually, it was the traveling sales person.... either mundane as sexual union or exalted as 
universalization. 

Pluto in detriment. The rejection of allegiance as submission to established order. The whole nature of 
this is that the 59.3 in its detriment is promiscuity. This is bonds being made and broken. 

When you come to the Book of Letters: The depth of feelings that can enrich union and intimacy. On the 
other side: Sensitivity to controls which may eventually reject intimacy. Think about how that works: 
these people will never like control. They will always be sensitive to control. When they are at their high 
end of the wave it does not matter. When they are at the low end of their wave it does. That is important 
to recognize for people who have that line. Somebody at the high end of their wave will submit 
themselves to the established order, to the bargain of the relationship, and at the low end of the wave will 
totally reject that. This is a genetic strategy to make sure that there is genetic diversity, which means that 
it can be a very difficult thing to handle in relationships. 

By the way, I tell all couples who go through this process which is rooted in the third line to recognize 
that the relationship cannot be what everybody else assumes it should be. These people have to take 
different vacations. They can live in different houses. They can have different lives and they can have 
continuity in the bonds made and broken. This is the nature of the third line. If the relationship honors the 
mechanics, then the relationship can be healthy. That is true for any of these qualities of intimacy. The 
thing to recognize is that you are always having the wave operating in the line. That is why the waiting, 
the retreat, is necessary from the very beginning, so you can be clear about that. "I am in the high end of 
my wave and I can submit to this authority but, before I can make a commitment, let me see what it feels 
like when I am at the low end of my wave. " 

Jiirgen and I were talking today about energies in houses and how nice it would be if, before you go into a 
place to buy or rent, they let you sleep there for two or three days, so that you can really see what that 
energy is like. If you go in at one part of your wave, you may feel that it is okay and at the other part of 
the wave, it may not. The reality is that relationships are the most important thing for us. If you ask 
people what is really important to them, they will tell you that it is who they can love and who is there in 
their life. We should then consider how little attention we pay to that. We are so quick to jump on the 
nature of the wave without seeing, "Wait a minute. Let us check it out." This is the whole thing about 
being emotional: waiting, so that you can see. If you do not wait, you are never going to know, 
particularly when you are dealing with the third line. The third line has to learn how to adapt to bonds 
being made and broken. You will never trust them, but they make babies. Irresponsibility breeds. 

6.4 Triumph 

Triumph. A position of natural and unchallengeable power. Here we have gone to the upper trigram. We 
have the line of externalization as a theme and this is always fixed on a single track. The single track here 
is to be the dominant emotional force. This is: "I am going to put my emotions across." This is the 
externalization of the emotional field, getting the emotional field across. 

Sun exalted. The charity and wisdom that must come with victory and the movement toward new 
horizons. It already says: they have the victory. If one is focused and one -tracked and is displaying 
emotional energy, there is nothing that you will be able to do about that. They win hands down. The only 
difficulty is when they are doing that with someone who is emotionally undefined they get a very 
powerful mirror back, and then you have an enormous amount of emotional tension that gets built. 

Pluto in detriment. The conqueror and purger. The externalization of the emotional motor can be very 
painful. There is a joke in all of this: this is the wave of kindness and meanness. The movement of that 
energy at one level is that this power display of energy expresses itself as very kind. It is the emotional 
wave that overwhelms you with its kindness. It can also overwhelm you with its meanness. It can be very 

fixed in both. It can be fixed on being emotionally kind to you and then (the wave can be a lengthy one) it 
will flip over to the other side, all of a sudden. 

The role on the other side is brotherhood/sisterhood. The strategy is that you are not going to be able to 
fuck with someone until they are your friend. I am crude for a reason because this is what it is all about. It 
is a strategy: I am not able to be penetrated or penetrate until this person is my friend, so that there is this 
power wave to create the intimacy. That power wave is either kind or mean. By the way, some people are 
enormously seductive by being mean. We have a whole world of masochists and sadists. It will always be 
there because it is part of the matrix. It is built into this line. 

In the Book of Letters: The power of emotions to dominate a relationship. The whole thing for these 
people is that, in terms of the mundane, they are much better off with people in their lives who are already 
emotionally defined. They have a very difficult time with people who are undefined emotionally. Every 
time they display their power, they will get the mirror. That mirror can be so intense that it can lead to all 
kinds of real meanness. It can be explosive and violent, like all emotional things. 

The lack of emotional control that is destructive in relationships. That operates in the wave. Sometimes 
that lack of emotional control simply ends up being just kind. Then it is seeking out the kindness. It can 
be mean. It can be the other side. It will always move through the wave. But the thing to recognize about 
this line is that it is putting out this emotional process, regardless. It does not matter what the situation is. 
It is the one that has to have the emotional control. It is the one that has to dominate in the emotional 
field. These are people that, if you are upset, they get more upset. If you are an emotional being and you 
have one of these people around, they will be more emotional than you over you being emotional. Your 
husband dies and they cry harder. That is their kindness. They can also be much meaner. You can see that 
with kids. One kid is mean and the next kid is meaner. The poor victim on the other side that used to be 
one of their friends. 

6.5 Arbitration 

The fifth line is Arbitration. The wave here is selfishness and selflessness, and this is all about seduction. 
This is about being the seducer and the seduced. We call it a line of universalization. All universalization 
is about seduction. This is the fulfillment of the hexagram. 

The faith derived from analytical diligence and emotional control that permits a higher authority to judge 
a conflict. That can be very mystical. What it really says is that time is the only authority that will allow 
clear assessment of the nature of any intimacy. Remember, this line is in resonance to The Guerilla, to the 
projected field and to the dilemma that comes out of advance and withdrawal. This is different. It is at a 
higher level. 

Venus exalted. Harmony furthered through the avoidance of direct conflict. That harmony is about the 
inner harmony. After all, you have to love yourself first. This is one of the laws about who is worthy of 
your love. Love yourself first. This is the first step. At that moment you come to Arbitration. 

Sensitivity to conflict can lead to the avoidance of intimacy. "I will go up and down in my wave as an 
emotional being. I need to find harmony within myself and not any old intimacy is going to work. I have 
to see which intimacy is best and the moment I see, I will seduce it. If it allows me to seduce it, it is for 
me." That is the whole nature of seduction. The seducer and the seduced are one. 

On the other side of this is the Moon in detriment, Where a party to arbitration sees itself as the best 
possible judge and will only accept judgment if it is the victor. In the Book of Letters: Insensitivity to the 
concerns of others in a conflict. This is really looking for what is the nature of the relationship. What kind 

of bargain will we have? What kind of house will we live in? Will we have a white picket fence? Will we 
have three or seven children? What is built in here is a sensitivity to what the intimacy has to be, the 
universalization of what intimacy is supposed to be. This is all about being sensitive to the other and 
recognizing whether they are the right relationship for you. If not, don't have anything to do with it 
because this kind of intimacy is there to lead to the production of children. 

The whole thing is that, unlike the third line which is all about any kind of genetic material as long as it is 
new and is going to change the old form, the fifth line is interested in intimacy that can be maintained, 
that can stand in time. So, this insensitivity to the concern of others: one of the things to see about that is 
that the fifth line isn't looking for a dilemma in its relationship. It is looking for a harmonious relationship 
that will work. They are very fixed in that and they do not put up with people who try to break into that 
harmony. They end up wanting to be the ones who are always the arbitrators, even at its best. 

6.6 The Peacemaker 

When you get to the sixth line, you get to the top of the house. You get to the line of transition. This sixth 
line in its resonance to the third line is strongly fertile like the third line but it is less likely to reproduce. It 
is looking for something much greater in that. What it is looking at has nothing to do with the other 
person. It has to do with the world their children will live in. This is a deep look over the top of the roof 
out into the world. If you could hear these people in their wave, they would say at the high end of the 
wave, I know that I have to have children but in what kind of world will they live?" At the low end of the 
wave it is, "I know that I should have children but it is a terrible world they will live in." On the other side 
they say, "I am not going to have children because the world is awful," or "I am not going to have 
children because I can't be sure that it will be a better world." This has nothing to do with the nature of 
direct intimacy and in that sense it can be something that can appear to be deeply apathetic. 

This is the wave of sympathy and apathy. It is in resonance to the role of the One Night Stand. I remind 
people that this is deeply misunderstood, this One Night Stand. That may be the only time that a sixth line 
will actually have an intimacy: maybe once in their life or maybe a lot, until they learn in their wave. The 
transition field is what will happen generationally. 

Remember, this is the defense circuit. This is where life is being generated. The law of growth for 
humanity is: Make more. Here it is not about who I will make more with. It is about what kind of world 
are my children going to live in. By the way, that can be deeply delusional. 

The Peacemaker. The discipline and integrity of a superior force to unilaterally cease conflict to permit 
surrender and survival of its foe. "I know that the world out there will never allow my children to have a 
decent life, so I am not intimate with you." It can seem incredibly rational. "I am not going to get 
involved with this relationship because I know that the result of this relationship will bring a hard time in 
the world." You hear these people make these kinds of comments all the time. 

Mercury exalted. The highest form of reason is that life is sacred. "I know that I must have children, but 
what kind of world will they live in?" This is that transition point 

Venus in detriment. The peacemaker whose actions are just but whose terms are unacceptable. I know 
what kind of intimacy I would like to have with you as a person. I know what intimacy is. I am a sixth 
line," says this person. "But I am not interested in that. I am interested in what world my children will live 
in. If it is not a good world, I don't want to have anything to do with this." What judges that? This is an 
emotional wave after all. 

In the Book of Letters: The emotional power to end conflict tempered by feelings and sensitivity to 
others. "If I will have children, I will have them with you." That is the sympathetic side. The apathetic 
side is not caring whether they understand why, or why not. You will not engage in that intimacy. This is 
the whole thing to recognize about this sixth line. The sixth line here, particularly in this sense, doesn't 
have to engage in intimacy. Intimacy for them represents something much greater. 

The emotional power to end conflict but only after one's conditions have been satisfied. They are always 
looking for a way in which they can be the ones who are in charge of the emotional quality of the 
relationship. They are the ones that are setting this condition for what the possibility can be. Often, these 
people end up with partners where they both work and try to make the world a better place. We have a lot 
of these sixth line people. It is in the nature of the sixth line to make the world a better place. They are 
often couples who will be doing service work or dedicating their time to the community, working out that 
process. Here are my conditions. Let me establish the conditions. Vvre have to work for a better world so 
that our children can come into a better world. 

When the emotional spirit awakens in the 55.6, the resonance will come from this sixth line. This would 
be the first aspect of the sixth gate that will have an emotional awareness that will lead to a whole new 
perception of the nature of the world. We will eliminate a lot of this fear that is there that the 6th gate 
sees: the fear that the world can be a horrible place. The 6.6 looks over to the 46.1. They want to know 
that their children are in the right place at the right time. 

HEXAGRAM 7 THE ARMY 

This is one of the Sphinx gates and essentially, in many ways, the most influential. This is a gate that 
leads to the gate of Influence. When we looked at prenatal infrastructure in the second gray course, the 
31/7 is the first channel that is initiated in the development of a human being. So, this channel has 
particular importance. When look at the circuitry of logic, you can see the deep limitations that are built 
into the logic system even though they are so important to us. The limitation is that it is very difficult for 
logic to get access to energy. The logic system from the throat does not have a direct channel access to a 
motor. The throat to the G center or to the splenic center does not provide a motor, which is why we end 
up in the logic system with all kinds of committees and all kinds of discussions and research. 

Experimentation is the goal of the logical process and, unlike the 13th gate which is there to look 
backwards and to accumulate past experience for the advantage of society, the 7th gate looks out of the 
window of the car into the future. It is saying: this is a straight road. It seems that everything is going to 
be okay for the next couple of hundred kilometers. Above the lines it says: The point of convergence. 
This is the place where the future of humanity comes to a point. It is a very important one for us. 
Humanity needs the security of safe, reliable patterns. By design, the need for leadership to guide and 
order society. The most important thing is for humanity to realize that it is hierarchical. Society needs to 
be ordered and guided and there are those who guide and those who are guided, and those you order and 
those who are ordered. It is the nature of the logical way that the pattern is built on a hierarchical 
structure. 

Think about what the 7 does. It establishes a pattern and because of the pattern being for the future, if that 
pattern can be expressed, it can become influential. We are looking at a classic example at what happens 
with the collective process. At the end of the Second World War, most of Asia was deeply poor and the 
Americans, as they entered into Europe, invested in infrastructure in Japan. The Japanese started to make 
factories to produce goods that would be exported, not goods that would be for their own market. They 
became successful at that, as we all know. They became an enormously successful society creating large 
infrastructure projects to create large amounts of manufactured goods to export into the world in order to 
make a living. That became a pattern that, by its very success, became influential and that pattern was 
passed on to other Asian societies, so that we suddenly had an age of so-called Asian tigers. All of these 
Asian tigers together have been following this pattern for prosperity. They have been building all these 
factories in order to sell those goods overseas. 

Nobody paid attention to the fact that, if you follow that pattern long enough, you get to a point where 
there is nothing but factories and nobody to buy the goods. This year (1997) with Saturn in 21 now and 
before, because it has been in a retrograde process, we have an enormous financial crisis in the world. The 
logic system is there to provide us with secure patterns. Unfortunately, unless those patterns are properly 
tested and experimented with, we can always end up with difficulties and then society goes into a state of 
chaos because without the reliable pattern everything falls apart. The vast majority of the middle class in 
Asia has lost at least half of their life's savings in the last three months. Humanity has been shocked by a 
pattern that appeared to operate properly, but when it finally got out to full maximum experimentation, 
suddenly it turned out to be an enormous problem. This pattern cannot be repaired because it is a pattern. 

What will be required is mutation and that mutation does not exist in the world right now to be able to 
deal with that dilemma. It still has a long way to go before the cards are played out. The 7th gate is there 
to provide us with secure patterns for the future but, like my illustration, it does not mean that the pattern 
is necessarily going to work in the long run. This is what the individual role does. It knows that time is 
everything and that only time is truly the test, but the logic system is desperate to get things out into the 
world, desperate to get the energy to get their experiment out into the world. The moment that an 
experiment works, does not mean that we should jump on the band wagon. It has to be tested over and 

over again. The nature of the role of the self in interaction: what is the role of leadership for humanity? 
We have the following six variations. 

7.1 The Authoritarian 

The first line is the basis and the foundation of all leadership. The foundation of leadership is obvious. It 
is authoritarian and that is something for us to recognize. No matter how much we would like to see the 
equality in all things, it does not exist. What we have is vast differentiation which creates an inherent 
hierarchy. The Authoritarian. The iron hand, both enlightened and despotic. In other words, authority will 
be either positive or negative because that depends on other factors. Sometimes it is both at the same time. 

Venus exalted, as in the basic values and rules imposed on a child. For most of our history, that is the way 
it worked. Those who ruled us assumed that we were rather infantile and had to be treated as children so 
that we would able to survive. So we had kings, shahs and popes who ruled over us and thought us to be 
rather immature and infantile and had to be looked after. We were their children of the state. We belonged 
to them in that sense. 

The other side of the authoritarian is: The distorted intellect that believes only it knows best. Whenever I 
meet people who have the 7.1 in detriment, I always tell them, "Fine. Good. If you only know best, good. 
If people do not agree with you, tough." Never look at what seems to be a negative line and say: "You 
have to fix that." No, you have to live that. Like The Optimist in the 13.6, the moment that you live that 
aspect you will discover that it is good and bad. It is right and wrong. It is great and terrible. Don't get 
caught up in thinking in the language of it that, because there is a detriment in front of it, it means that it 
is inherently difficult. This is not true. Most people have trouble with their exaltations. 

In the white book: The capacity of the Self to guide with authority; or The capacity of the Self to insist 
that its authority is best. Remember that it is a first line. Most people who have the 7. 1 are trying to figure 
out what authority is. It is not that they are transpersonal and they are ready to externalize that as 
influence. When their opportunity comes, they must be authoritarian. It is the basis of leadership. There is 
a famous American president, Harry S Truman, who had this wonderful plate on his desk that said: "The 
buck stops here." Somebody had to be at the end of the line somewhere, all the time. That is the way it 
works. 

7.2 The Democrat 

Obviously, this is a gate in which there is the capacity to lead. This is the role of the leader and so, when 
you come to the second line, this is somebody who does not know that they have the capacity to lead. It is 
other people who see it. This is the basis of what we call democracy. The moment that somebody is aware 
of that fact that they can lead, it is a different story. Others have to bring out this quality of leadership and 
it speaks of the nature of our democratic system, which is based on leadership being dependent on society 
providing the energy in that sense, that they provide the votes, as an example. 

So here we have The Democrat. An overview line: The ability to lead by serving the will of the majority. 
Of course, the whole thing about the democrats is that they just don't know that. They don't know that 
they have the role. The role is found out and the moment the role is found out, they have this opportunity 
that they can be brought into the democratic process. 

Neptune exalted. (Remember what I said about Neptune exalted.) The application of universally accepted 
systems. When connected through the Alpha Channel to Gate 31 Influence, the potential for widespread 
and revolutionary effect on society. This generation that was born in this century, I think in the 20's, this 
is an essential ingredient for the maintenance of democracy in the world. 

This is a second line that is very exalted in that sense and it does have universal impact because the 
universal impact is that logic only works out of the sharing process and this is the best way to share 
leadership that we have. I think it was Churchill who said: democracy is not the best that is possible, but it 
is the best we have. 

Mercury in detriment. Elitism and denegation by democrats of democracy. This is very common. The 
second line, the paper tiger, you look inside and it looks like they have that role and you bring that role 
out in them only to discover that they really would like to be dictators. It does not mean that they are 
democratic. It simply means that the possibility of that is there. Of course, this is a very common thing. 
The moment that these people really get into power, the moment that they get to assume their role, those 
are the people who turn around and say: the very voters that voted for them are too dumb to vote for them 
again and they are going to have to manipulate them because they are not very intelligent. It was the same 
very unintelligent people that found out that these people had a role in the first place, and put them up into 
that position. 

In the white book: The capacity of the Self to lead when chosen. Very important: to lead when chosen. Or 
The capacity of the Self once chosen to feel superior to those who chose them. "I am your leader and 
therefore I am better than you.' The second line is itself surprised to have been elected. The classic 
example for a 7.2 is Indira Gandhi. 

In looking at transits you have to pay attention to the outer planets because when they go through any 
particular gate or sequence of gates, you are going to have generations of people coming into the world 
that carry a similar kind of energy. One of the most interesting phenomena that are taking place since the 
Second World War is the level of diversity that exists in the nature of roles. For example, when I came 
into the world, if you had a doctor, the doctor was known as a general practitioner who was somebody 
that came to your house when you were sick. He was a real doctor and did everything. If you take a look 
now at any kind of medical registry or any kind of community in the Western world, you will find that 
there are thousands, literally thousands of different doctor roles. There is an enormous diversification that 
we have now. 

The reason for that is that we have a whole generation of people that came into the world after the Second 
World War, like my generation who was born in 1948, that had Pluto in Leo. Pluto stayed there for a long 
time impacting heavily on these role gates through their expression by being in the 33, the 31, the 56 and 
the 7. There was a very strong and long term activation by Pluto there. In my generation, Saturn was also 
there and, in my particular case, Mars was there. So, we have a generation of people that are somewhere 
in their late 40's or early 50's that carry in them an enormous amount of potential to actualize roles in the 
world. I have three different lines in the 7: the 2, the 3 and the 6. This is a very common thing amongst 
my generation to have a lot of active role gates. I have Saturn in the third line and I love it. The Anarchist 
is a very funny place for Saturn to be. That is the last thing on earth Saturn is associated with. 

7.3 The Anarchist 

The Anarchist. An overview line. It is trial and error in finding a role. Remember the parallel in the 13.3 
is Pessimism. That pessimism is inherent in TheAnarchist. My way of relating to this line is what 
Groucho Marx, the comedian, taught me. He said, 'Never belong to an organization that would have you 
as a member," and this is the nature of the 7.3. The rejection of any institutionalized order. You notice 
that it is an overview. It does not mean that you reject your mother because she has given you milk. It 
takes time before you get to the point where you realize, through trial and error, that the institutionalized 
way will not work and you are not somebody that is waiting to be chosen. 

The Moon exalted. The constant need for change no matter what the prevailing conditions. Mercury in 
detriment. The nihilist. In the white book: The drive of the Self to express many roles; or The capacity of 
the Self to deny value in any role. 

It does not mean that these people do not get into the institutions. They do. Of course, the moment that 
they get in, they rebel against them and eventually have to leave in one way or another; this constant 
movement. 

On the detriment side, it can get to the point of just pure nihilism. Nothing works so let's break 
everything. People really misunderstand anarchy. I am a great burner of things. I have burned so many 
things in my life. There is a great joy for me in burning things. I have burned books that I have written 
that nobody ever got to see and I would just sit there and watch it burn. That is the anarchist. It burns so 
that something new may be built upon it. No guarantee that it will be something new, but the pessimism 
that says that whatever is there stinks and, unless we knock it down, nobody will build up anything new. 
The nature of the anarchist. 

7.4 The Abdicator 

When you are dealing with these roles gates, the upper trigram, particularly the fourth and fifth lines, are 
always very significant because they have the opportunity to recognize how the role can get out. They 
know that there is a gate at the other end. When you come to the 7.4, The Abdicator, you come to a line 
that is often misunderstood. The fourth line is one-tracked. Here you have somebody who needs to 
externalize their role as a leader. They need to. It must come out for them. That is what they are here to 
do. They know that there is another side so they know that they have to deal with that other side because 
everybody in the 7th gate knows that logic requires energy, and the fourth line needs to compromise. 

Think about what the fourth line always represented in the 10.4 because it tells you so much about it: 
Opportunity. This is always a line of opportunism. If you have a lover, don't leave him or her until you 
have another lover. If you have a job, don't leave it until you have a new one. This is the nature of the 
10.4. This is what opportunism is about. So, it is important for the abdicator to realize that when the 
opportunity is there, they can externalize their role, but the opportunity comes and goes and they won't 
always be able to externalize it. 

The willingness to accept the judgment of the people and/or the rule of law. What I try to explain to the 
7.4's that their leadership role is of value until it is rejected and then it is time to go on to something else. 
This is the Peter Principle, which is to reach a level of incompetence. In other words, you get to a certain 
point where the majority no longer wants your leadership. It does not mean that your leadership is bad. It 
means that the majority is ready for another pattern. It means that your time is up. 

The Sun exalted. The grace and wisdom to step down for the benefit of the whole. In the white book: The 
capacity of the Self to accept the judgment of others. Everything about the logical role demands that there 
will be collective backing for that role. It cannot work otherwise. It is not possible, even when you have 
the most vicious dictator. They did not get there alone. You can have the most vicious 7.1 you can 
imagine, connected in resonance to the 31.1. You can have the deepest darkness of leadership and you 
have that person surrounded by those that are backing that. Nothing, no role, no leadership is possible. 
Who is it to lead them? There always has to be someone who wants them to lead. All roles in gate 7 have 
to be voted for and backed. 

So, on one side is the ability to accept that, "You made me a leader, I have done my work. You don't want 
me to be leader anymore. Very good, I step down." There is nothing wrong with that. It means that that is 

correct. But the moment that we get into the detriment, they stay in power. The refusal of the Self to 
accept the judgment of others. 

In the black book: Uranus in detriment. One who must be forced from power by overwhelming 
opposition. Like the listener in the 13.4, they are so busy externalizing that they forget that it has its 
limitations. If you keep on listening and you don't take a rest, you get ill. If you keep on trying to lead 
when your time is up, you breed revolt. It is what we see in the world all the time. You get somebody into 
power and everybody is excited. They are wonderful and get voted in; they can be democratic (they can 
be any kind) and then they just stay there and don't go away and their time of leadership, their time of 
value is over, and everybody knows that it is over. 

What they are doing now is that they are filling their pockets and their children's pockets; for example, a 
guy that is running for the 7th time. He can barely breathe for god's sake. This is what this is about. In 
other words, one -tracked in living out the role and yet not realizing that the role has to come to an end 
and, instead of them becoming sick, somebody makes them sick. These are people that get the plug pulled 
out. These are people that have their telephones disconnected. Like Mobutu in Zaire, who transformed 
from national hero to king of thieves: he was valuable to the country as he brought a new pattern. By now 
he's already outlived his purpose and is now filling his children's pockets until the country's had enough 
and puts him into exile. 

It's not like they are not supposed to have a role. They are here to be wonderful leaders and then give up. 
These are the kind of people that accept to be the chancellor for Germany for one term and after five 
years, they go home. They did their job. They did what they wanted to do for the people. The people are 
satisfied and then they step down because it is time for somebody else to take over the job. In that sense, 
it is very exalted. It is the first line's harmony: It is limited authority in terms of time span. That is what 
we have in our political systems: we try to limit the authority of our elected officials. Vke say that they 
can only be in power for four years or they can only run twice, or whatever. This is what we are 
establishing out of the fourth line. 

7.5 The General 

The line of projection: the fifth line in its harmony to the second line. The fifth line is always waiting to 
be the savior (like the 13.5) of democracy. The General. The whole thing about being a 7.5 is that 
everybody projects on you that you are the one that should lead, whether you are equipped to lead or not. 
Anybody who has the 7.5 has to pay a lot of attention to the fact that they are called on in life to lead and 
if they can fulfill that, obviously their reputation will grow. The whole thing about this is that it is 
projected on. 

Leadership whose authority must be absolute and is sanctioned by society in times of crisis. That is when 
these people are important. In the harmony to democracy, society will give up its democratic leader when 
it is in trouble. This line is patterned on the ancient Greek community in which there was a relative 
democracy, but when they got into trouble they would go to one of their military commanders, one of 
their generals, and they said, "Look, we are in a lot of trouble. We will give up our democratic ways and 
we ask you to be dictator until you defeat our enemies. By the way, when the enemies are defeated we 
want you to allow us to go back and be a nice democracy and we will give you a pension and we will 
have a parade for you and everything will be terrific." 

This is what is expected. This is what humanity sees as the greatest value of a leader, which is that the 
leader is there to guide us in times of crisis. This is when leaders are important to us. If you go back 
through history, those leaders that are remembered are leaders that took their people through a time of 
trial or turmoil or war. So the general, this form of leadership, is called upon in times of crisis. In other 

words, these are not people to be involved in a day-today leadership. They are called to leadership in 
times of crisis. 

Venus exalted. The gift of attracting loyally necessary in harmonizing the potential of society. Again, it is 
a very important social context here in the most transpersonal of these lines. The capacity of the Self 
through its role to attract loyalty. It attracts loyalty before it starts. There are all kinds of people that say, 
"Look, we are in trouble and I know that general so-and-so could really help us." The loyalty is already 
there because when this 7.5 is around, people always project on it, "You know, he would be the best 
leader. He/she would be able to solve our problem." 

The Neptune in detriment. The commander isolated from his troops and obsessed with victory at any 
price. In the white book: The lack of loyalty when the Self insists on isolation. This is a very common 
thing that happens to 7.5's, which is: they do not show up in times of crisis. They stay isolated and the fact 
that they are isolated when there is crisis all along makes everybody else nervous. As a matter of fact, 
7.5's are the kinds of people that whoever is an authority may even find them to be very threatening 
because they know that if they came out into public, they would be strong leaders and might challenge 
their own role. All projected fifth lines do not necessarily want to participate in the process. They want to 
be selective about when they take leadership. They are not fourth lines. They are not there to lead all the 
time. So in the detriment, when the 7.5 does not show up, does not come around and make itself available 
in times of crisis, there are those that can actually find that threatening, that are the ones who are trying to 
fulfill that role themselves. 

So The General has these two sides to it, but always remember: it is coming from the projected field. It is 
coming from the need in times of crisis because humanity is in trouble, because society is in danger and is 
threatened. But as long as that role is not offered in times of crisis, then the person itself becomes 
somebody that is considered to be dangerous, isolated from its troops, isolated from its supporters that are 
out there saying: we really need you to come now and help us because we are in so much trouble. 

There is this wonderful story of the Messiah coming into the world. He comes into the world, he hangs 
around for a while, then he checks everything out and he starts teaching a few people and he says: "You 
know, I don't feel like doing this. Everybody is projecting on me that I am the Messiah, and I feel like 
somebody who wants to farm." So the Messiah gives up and goes and sits on a farm. Because the 
presence is there and the projected power of the savior is there, all kinds of people get upset and they kill 
him because he would not play his role as Messiah. It is a very nice story. Very typical of the 7.5 in 
detriment. The lack of loyalty when the Self insists on isolation. I am blessed that I don't have the first, 
fourth or fifth line. Life is cute sometimes. I would not want to be a 7.5, not with my configuration. 

7.6 The Administrator 

Sixth lines are always so strange. Remember The Optimist in the 13.6 because it helps to understand The 
Administrator in the 7.6. Everything about the sixth line is about sitting and looking, paying attention to 
what is there in the circuitry. The moment you get to the 7.6, you actually get to a great deal of pressure 
because the logical circuitry is so important. The right patterns for humanity are so important, but there is 
something else. The Optimist in the 13.6 carries with it an optimism or a hope that any interaction is 
important and the mystical beauty of the 7.6 is the recognition that all human beings are leaders, all of 
them, and that they all have a role in this life and that can be very beautiful. 

So, here in The Administrator is an overview line: The ability to share and justly apportion power. Think 
about the 7.6 child. It is 5 years old and it says to its father, "You should really organize your time better. 
I know exactly what you should do and, Mother, I know exactly what you should do." How long will that 
kid live? The fact is that every time that you look at any line and you see it in the context of a child, you 

automatically will understand how distorted our upbringings have been. If you don't know the nature of 
the child, then how is it even possible to nurture their being? You can't. You can only respond to that in 
your own conditioning. So the moment that this child begins to administrate, the first thing that happens is 
that it is told to shut up and mind its own business and it learns to sit on the roof and it learns to watch 
what is going on. 

Mercury exalted. The power to communicate the frameworks of responsibility. The fact is that, because of 
their perspective and recognition of the importance of the whole logical process, they recognize that 
many, many roles are involved. That is a real gift, to be able to see them. 

In the white book: The capacity of the Self through its role to communicate responsibility. I am a 7.6 and 
I tell everybody that they do not need a guru or a master. Everybody can be their own chief. This is 
classic of the 7.6. By the way, for most of my life that was the last thing I would bother to tell anybody, I 
would just watch their folly. 

Uranus in detriment. The bureaucrat whose lust for power eventually destabilizes the organization. The 
capacity to recognize clearly what roles people should have also leads to possibilities of power and abuse. 
The fact is that it does not happen all that often. Yes, it is there. You are not really going to see 7.6's who 
will be active in the direct leadership business. What you will see out of the 7.6 is the creation of what we 
call bureaucracies: The Egyptian disease where you have administrators who administrate the state and it 
just gets bigger and bigger, and everybody has a role. In that way, out of the detriment comes abuse of 
those powers where the entrenched bureaucracy, the administrators, have more power than those that are 
elected. Recognize that most 7.6's, by the time that they are adults, by the time that they get into their 
twenties, have already given up on the business of being leaders and they tend to be very good at pointing 
out what other people can do. Everyone can be a leader. 

The 7.6 then leads to the 4.1., this is quite a process. Timing is everything. You have to wait for the right 
time. Pleasure (4.1) cannot be achieved without perfect timing. This goes back to the whole business of 
what it is to be in direction anyway. 

HEXAGRAM 8 HOLDING TOGETHER 

Moving down from the throat center, we move to the polarity gates, gates that point up to the throat from 
the G center: not gates pointed up towards the mental process (the gates that are primary gates of 
communication) but gates that are primary gates of identity, gates that communicate the nature of the 
identity. Each and every one of these gates pointing up to the throat, including the 8th gate, has a direct 
connection to the G center, to the center of our identity. Therefore, these gates speak of three different 
qualities of identity. We have collective identity: the logical Identity in the 31 and an abstract identity in 
the 33. The 8th gate in the center speaks for the individual identity. It is called Holding Together. 

Above the lines it says: The basic worth realized in contributing individual efforts to group goals. The 
whole nature of this gate is its voice and its voice says, "I know I can." It also says, "I know I can't." Like 
all of these voice gates, you have the polarity built into it. "I know I can make a contribution to group 
effort through my individuality." This is the nature of this 8th gate. 

8.1 Honesty 

First lines always speak of the essence of a hexagram and this first line is called Honesty. It says, The 
truthful acceptance of limitation and the recognition that it can only be transcended through sharing. This 
is so important: the individual is always limited because nothing in the individual process can actually 
flower unless it is being accepted either by the collective or the tribe. We have already seen that social 
pressures are going to be very important in the development of an individual life. This 8th gate is a deep 
recognition that the individual is there to guide the collective. After all, the 1st gate which is on the other 
side is one of the four gates of the Sphinx. This is a gate of direction and it is part of the central column 
that runs up and it is all about a mutative process. 

The 8th gate expresses the identity of the individual that says, "I will share with you my knowing for your 
benefit." That is the individual process. "I want to be able to contribute my knowing, my recognition, my 
capacity to explain to you what the direction is and I want to share that with you for your benefit so that 
you won't hurt me because I am different than you are." 

On one side you have Neptune exalted. The awareness that the whole is always greater than the sum of its 
parts. This is a deep recognition, the understanding that nothing, the knowing in that sense, is complete 
unless it involves the totality. This is the beginning of the process of the individual acting as an agent of 
change in the world because they recognize that they must penetrate into the collective. 

On the other side of this, the Mercury in detriment. Withdrawal. The fear of losing individuality in a 
group environment. This is the fundamental fear of all individuality. "I know that I can make a 
contribution to the collective but does that mean that then I have to be just like them, when I don't want 
to? I can contribute by directing them but I don't want to be like them because I can't. I can only be like 
me. " This fear is underneath. 

In the white book: Knowing that creative expression must be honestly communicated and shared. 
Understand that the 8/1 is the channel of the Creative Role Model. This is about being an example and not 
being a leader (that is logical), not being a witness (that is abstract). It is about being an example. An 
example does not dictate. An example acts out its example in the hope that that can be a contribution to 
the totality. 

The other side: The design to share creativity at the expense of individuality. "Yes, we love your 
contribution but from now on you have to make your contribution on Mondays, V*dnesdays and Fridays 
from 10 to 12." This is always the threat to the individual. There is a balancing point between maintaining 

one's individuality and reaching out to the collective. All of my definition is individual and I have gone 
through this process all of my life. I deal with you as a collective. I have found a medium for that because 
I happen to be an individual that can explain myself. In being able to explain myself, I can connect to the 
collective but believe me, I am different than you and I know that and nothing about you will change me. 
The joke is that I want to make a contribution for you. After all, the individual is doing that to protect 
itself. That is number one. 

The second thing is if it works, the individual feels very good about that. Connecting to the collective is 
important. There is no Human Design System without the collective. The individual becomes stronger in 
that, whether or not it is connected to the ego. If it becomes egotistical about it, that is another story but 
they do become stronger and they do contribute to protect themselves. 

Please understand: that is by design the only genetic path for mutation. After all, it is for others. In the 
end, this contribution is there to provide mutation. By the way, that mutation can be good or bad. You can 
bring disease into the world as an individual and you can kill half the population. You can bring a mental 
virus into the world that destroys the way people see the world or think. I mean, everything is possible in 
the nature of what mutation is. It is just about the process but in that sense it is always about offering. 
That is why the third line says it is a phony. When we get to the third line, we get to that story. 

8.2 Service 

When you get to the second line, you get to projection. You are dealing here with a gate that says, "I 
know that I can make a contribution or not." When you get to the second line, they are projecting 
outwards the fact that they are there to make a contribution. It is the great line of service. Remember the 
nature of making a contribution: they are making it without really recognizing what is being contributed 
as a direction. They do not really have the depth. They just project out that they can make a contribution. 

Service. The highest good, to serve selflessly. The Earth in detriment, where reward is a prerequisite of 
service. It is a very simple line. In the white book: The potential to be an example through unselfish 
expression; or The willingness to be an example for a price. One or the other. These are the kind of people 
that will guide you through the city. You pay them and they'll guide you. They will take you along and 
they will leave you off when they are finished with you. They can do a very good job, individually, taking 
the collective on a tour and you pay them and later they'll leave you. Or they will do it selflessly: the lost 
tourist in the city and somebody comes very nicely and takes them on a tour and shows them where 
everything is. It can be selfless. It can be for pay but they do not really know what they are contributing. 
Because of that, they are projecting out that they can make the contribution but maybe they can't. 

Second lines can be paper tigers. They can always be putting out this genetic signal that says, "I can make 
a contribution," and when they are asked to make the contribution, they may not be able to fulfill it and 
then they go through the crisis of all individuality: when it cannot fulfill its example then it is shunned. 
The collective will not pay any attention anymore. 

My favorite description for the 8th hexagram is the taxi driver. This is really what the 8th hexagram is all 
about. You get into their car and they'll drive you along. They will take you from place to place. This is 
their nature but they are not there to stay with you. They are there to go through this directive process and 
make their contribution. So many people that have the 8th gate are disturbed by the fact that they can 
make a valid contribution for others but those others soon forget. They go on to other things. 

This is about the selflessness of the individual that is necessary. The joy comes from being yourself. The 
contribution to society allows you to maintain your integrity as an individual because they will leave you 
alone if you can make a contribution. Everybody thought that I was crazy until I had a book published and 

then it was risky. Then they said, "Well, he made his contribution. We can leave him alone now. We don't 
have to worry about whether we should put him into a strait jacket." 

8.3 The Phony 

We get to the end of the lower trigram. Remember that lower trigrams are only concerned about the 
nature of the gate itself. This is the line of John Paul U. You can enjoy my analysis of that. 

The acceptance of the style and not the substance of communal actions. Again, all third lines are lines of 
adaptation. They are the basis of trial and error. They are based on this learning process. What is 
recognized in that learning process is that the individual cannot survive unless they find a way, a mode, a 
role, a mask, a style for being able to connect to the collective. What happens to people that have the 8.3 
is that they look for the right kind of style. Jean Paul II found his style. He has a tall hat, a stake and they 
all have their costumes. Through that style, even though he is very individual, something is expressed to 
the collective. The collective gets access to his guidance, to his example, because he is a master of that 
style. To be a phony is neither positive nor negative. It is simply the real description of what this is. The 
style is everything. 

The Moon exalted. The perfected and rarely detected superficial intimacy. This is classic of the 
individual: the style to create the intimacy and yet, at the same time, a deep protection that says, "Hey, I 
am still this individual." 

The other side has Saturn in detriment. A shallowness that underestimates others and overestimates its 
own ability to continue its deception without detection. Style is style. It is not substance. This is the 
individual playing out a role and, in playing out that role, they make mistakes and grow out of that 
process. 

In the white book: The example as an expression through style, not substance; or An over-reliance and 
unfounded confidence in style. These are people that when the collective is not interested in them and 
their style has not worked, they cannot figure out why. "Why didn't it work? I mean I look like a guru, I 
talk like a guru. Why didn't anybody come?" Style is not always the real thing but it helps individuals to 
have a mask. The individual pretends to be like the collective. 

8.4 Respect 

When you get to the upper trigram in this gate of contribution that is designed to connect to the collective, 
you get to transpersonal gates. So you get to the innate ability within the individual in this line: to be able 
to reach out to the community or the tribe. This line is called Respect. Remember that fourth lines are all 
about being fixed and onetracked but they are also deeply opportunistic, waiting for those opportunities. 

The gift of naturally recognizing the contributions of others and particularly, the acknowledgement of 
those who lead by example. Jupiter exalted. The uncompromising drive to assimilate. Remember 
something about the 8: it is looking to the other side, to the 1. The 1 is the yang force. This is the creative 
direction in life. This is the individual creative expression. You can imagine that the 1 is the artist and the 
8 is the gallery dealer. That is their relationship. 

The capacity in the 8.4 is to recognize the value of the creative potential on the other side and to see that 
that creative potential, through their contribution, is something that can affect the totality. It is the art 
dealer that sees the starving painter and looks at the paintings and thinks, "Oh, my god. This is 
wonderful." He puts it into his shop and all of a sudden, they become well-known because that 
contribution has been made. 

On the other side: Mercury in detriment. In a group where limitation is transcended, reason alone cannot 
predict individual worth. As an example, the acknowledged leader of an athletics team is not necessarily 
the most talented. The individual who is fixed on making a contribution can be the one that really 
becomes the leader and the example in that sense. This example of an athletic team: you may have an 
athlete on that team who is somebody whose very spirit is about making a selfless contribution to the 
nature of how that team operates. They are the ones that will ultimately get the attention of the team and 
be a de facto leader by the quality of their example. What is being very fixed here is the fixed 
communication, the fixed expression of direction that the 8.4 knows it must make. 

In the white book: The drive to contribute and be an example to and for others, and on the other side: A 
gift for contribution that is not conditioned by limitations. This is a very positive line. These people can 
be very one -tracked. What happens to them is that they are very positive for everybody else but they 
suffer a great deal themselves. These are people that are always making a contribution and they don't 
necessarily feel like they are recognized for the contribution they are making. Remember that there is an 
intrinsic honesty in the resonance to the first line here in the fourth line. There is an honesty about who 
can really lead and who can't, who can really be an example and who can't. When they make their 
contribution, there is a sense that nobody is paying attention to them. The 8th gate can often feel unloved 
for its contribution and, of course, the sphinx gates are not about love. They are about direction. 

This is one of those things for all 8th gates to deal with: they have a capacity to contribute to others and 
make that contribution without necessarily being rewarded. That does not mean that they do not get the 
reward but it does mean that it is much more difficult because they are individual. 

I want to make a comment on the end of this line where it says that they are not necessarily the most 
talented. One of the keys to individuality: individuals are not here to be best. The moment that an 
individual thinks that they have to be the best, it is over. The best is for the collective. That is a collective 
thing. That is mastery, experimentation, to get to the point where you are really the best. But the 
individual is here to be different. They don't have to be the most talented athlete to be the focus of 
attention and to be the example that guides others. They just have to be themselves. 

Whenever I deal with individuals, I always remind them of that: "Do not punish yourself in thinking that 
you have to be the best. You never ever have to be the best. You only have to be yourself. If you are 
yourself, you will be recognized and if you try to be the best, you will not." Understand the principle of 
that. The collective process is about comparing and the individual process is not. So, the moment you are 
trying to be best, it is all a comparison game and it has nothing to do with being individual. 

8.5 Dharma 

First lines always tell you the essence of what that hexagram is about and fifth lines are always about how 
it is seen from the outside. The way that this individual contribution is seen from the outside is as 
something that is rooted in separation. In other words, the way in which the outside sees the individual 
through this fifth line is: "Let us take advantage of their direction but leave them once we get there." This 
is great line of the taxi driver. This line is called Dharma. Holding together does not exclude eventual 
separation. Successful union, after a proper term, will encourage separation. The fledgling once mature is 
expected to leave the nest. This is right action that does not harm the integrity of the union. 

It is very important for these people to recognize that other people need their direction but once they have 
it, it does not mean that they must go away; it means that they must be allowed to go away. In other 
words, for the person that has the 8.5, they can always make the contribution of direction but who they 
make that contribution to isn't necessarily going to be consistent. 

We have two ways of looking at that. One way is the exalted side with Jupiter, The teacher. The other is 
the Sun in detriment. The parent that cannot let go of the child, understanding only that its authority is 
being challenged. "I know what is best for you," says the parent. 

In the white book: Contribution as part of a process of sharing that accepts and expects limitation, 
exemplified in teaching. The ultimate goal of the individual teacher is to have students that not only 
transcend them but leave them. "Here, you have the knowledge. Go away. I do not want to see you again. 
Take the knowledge and do your thing." This is the essence of that one side. It is okay that you are not 
going to be there for the rest of this person's life. 

On the other side, in the detriment, is this sense of loss in the capacity to make that contribution: 
somebody accepts that contribution and all of a sudden they are gone. They have this sense of loss that 
they cannot continue to live out this role of contributing. Contribution as an end in itself that neither 
accepts nor expects limitation, exemplified by the parent that cannot let go of the child. 

The ideal is that when you are the 8.5 taxi driver, when you get to where they have to go, you have to let 
them out. You cannot keep them in the back seat. They have to pay you and go. Otherwise, you have a 
real problem. This is the nature of the 8.5, this recognition. Remember that it is projected on them that 
they can make the selfless contribution. "This one will take me. This one will guide me." Every time that 
individual is being asked for their guidance (and they are always looking for that out of the 8th gate), in 
that moment, this is a very important energy for them to come into contact with. 

It is difficult when that energy is gone unless one accepts the nature of what this role is: to make that 
contribution and recognize that it is not about fixing something for life. Again, that is the protection of the 
individual, not to get caught up in who you contribute to and end up being conditioned by them, away 
from your true nature. "You were so good at driving me in a taxi. Now I let you drive my bus." 

Think about the dilemma of the 8. You have the 8 and you go into a department store and somebody 
comes up to you and says, "Can you tell me where the such-and-such department is?" The 8 is always 
going to be asked for their service, no matter where they are. They are always going to be mistaken for 
people that can take you where you have to go. They are under a lot of pressure because of that. 

8.6 Communion 

When you get to the sixth line, you get to the end of the process and you get to Communion. It says: The 
certainty which grows out of harmony. Venus exalted. The awareness of patterns that ensures correct 
timing. This is one of the things that come out of the individual process which is the recognition that, 
without the correct timing, because individuals are rooted in their moods, contribution may not be 
successful. We all know this in one way or another, where you offer to make a contribution to somebody, 
to offer them direction. If you offer it at the wrong time, nothing is going to work, even if you are very 
clear. If you offer it at the right time, even if you are not clear, they are more open to it. Everything about 
the contribution of the individual to society is rooted in a sense of timing. 

Pluto in detriment. Doubt which may engender regret even in the most ideal circumstances. The polarity 
in the white book: The gift of knowing when to contribute creatively; or Uncertainty in timing and regret 
despite circumstances. Sixth lines are not about to make a contribution. Like all sixth lines, there is a 
restrictive process within them. It is a process that says, "Yes, but will this contribution lead to mutation?" 
In other words, if I am a taxi driver, I will only take somebody from A to B if it is going to change the 
world and if it will not change the world, why should I bother and just be the conduit of that? Is it really 
of value? Deep in the individual process is this ongoing need to find a way to bring mutation into the 

world. The sixth line is saying, "All right, I will make that contribution, but it has to be mutative. It has to 
be something that really is going to be of value." 

The knowing when to contribute is the recognition of patterns. Individuals need to come to grips with 
that. They have to understand the collective and the tribe because if they don't understand the others, if 
they do not understand their patterns, it will be much more difficult for them to make a contribution at the 
right time that can be mutative. 

Think about how that works. Several years ago, Martin Grassinger was doing homoeopathic work with 
one of his patients. They had a problem and he had the right medicine which he gave them but it did not 
work. This was in the early years, when we first met and I said, "Well, take a look at the transits and see 
when that part of the body is connected." It had to do with the face. It was somebody who had an open 
ajna and an open throat center. So, there was a transit coming, a nodal transit to the 43/23 that would 
connect the open centers, so that this medicine which is designed for the pituitary gland could actually get 
to these glands. He told the person to come back again and that he had found something that really 
worked (the same medicine). He gave the patient this medicine during the nodal transit which lasted two 
months and the problem cleared up. 

The success of individual contribution is determined by timing. If you give the right medicine at the 
wrong time, it means nothing. What happens is that this individual gets caught up in this process of 
"Where is the right cosmic moment?" It is not just the mundane timing. It is the timing that unleashes this 
process, unleashes this possibility, so that this contribution can lead to mutation. 

HEXAGRAM 9 THE TAMING POWER OF THE SMALL 

We move to the logic process and take a look at rituals and patterns. Two of the 64 hexagrams use the 
word 'taming' and there are two that use the word 'small'. The small has to do with the nature of detail. 
The ability to tame is the ability to master the nature of the detail. The 9th gate is the gate of the mastery 
of the energy for detail. This is the format energy of the logical process. One of the most difficult things 
in the nature of what it is to be human, with the configuration that we have, is to establish logic in the 
world. How difficult it is to establish understanding in the world because understanding does not have the 
same access to energy as other processes. It does not have the same easy access to energy as the abstract, 
the experiential process has. In order for us to establish logic and understanding in the world, it is quite an 
ordeal to find the energy. 

With the 9th and the fifth hexagrams, two gates of the sacral, we look at essential energy to manifest logic 
and understanding in the world so that we can be properly organized and, in being properly organized, we 
can have a relative perspective into the future. Only three gates provide energy for logic, the 58, the 9 and 
the 52. They are a long way from having an opportunity to be able to manifest and most of the logic and 
understanding that gets into the world is generated rather than manifested. Generated logic is quite 
different because it is logic that can only come out of response: out of response to a need for the logic. 

Above the lines it says: Potential can be fulfilled through detailed attention to all pertinent aspects. Don't 
confuse this with a mental perspective. It is not mental. This is pure energy. This is the energy to fulfill 
the potential through attention. This channel is all about being focused and concentrated. This is a deep 
concentrating and focusing field. 

9.1 Sensibility 

When we were looking at the abstract process, we saw that the 42 has resources of energy. What we see 
in the 9th hexagram is that we have a resource for concentration, what we call attention. The attention is 
there. We don't know out of this what the attention span is. Just like the 42 has to go to the 29 to find its 
commitment, the 9 has to go to the 5 to find out what its pattern must be. To be focused and concentrated 
is never enough. This is the beginning of a process. It is a process that says, in the first line, Sensibility. A 
balanced and responsible approach to problem solving. Pluto exalted. The ability to avoid frustration 
through the creation of new forms. The reality is that the focus here is not simply on the given, which is, 
"I have the capacity for attention". What is more important is how do I maintain that capacity for 
attention? 

Mars in detriment. After a hasty and frustrating search, the urge to kick in the door when the key is in 
your pocket. This is not recognizing what the pattern is. This is all about simply having this energy for 
concentration but not knowing where to concentrate, on what to concentrate. You think that if you 
concentrate on remembering where the keys are, somehow that will work. When it doesn't, when you 
can't go in there and find them, you get very frustrated and kick in the door. 

In the white book we have: The power in focusing to create new forms; or The power to generate that will 
lose its focus. Please understand this: this is about attention. % all know from children that to maintain 
their attention, either you fix their pattern or you cannot hold their attention. Otherwise, they will just 
move from this thing to the next because they do not have an extended attention span. That is why we 
need, in the logical process, to have a codified system that develops our logic. Vita have to learn the 
patterns of logic. This is very important for us because if we don't have the pattern, we can have the 
energy for the logical process but not know what to do with it. These people become deeply restless. They 
can focus their attention but on what? and how? and when? This is what they don't know. 

By the way, Pluto is coming in the 9th gate by the end of 1997. Pluto will transit this gate for three years. 
When it says, A balanced and responsible approach to problem solving, it is not saying 'a balanced and 
responsible approach to solving problems.' It is the process that gets to eventually solving a problem. 

9.2 Misery loves company 

What happens when you get to the second line, Misery loves company, the projection that is coming out 
of the second line is: "I can solve the problem because I can focus." This is not how the problem is 
solved. It is one necessary aspect in order to solve a problem eventually, but this is the illusion that is 
caught up in the projection. So many students of mine over the years, the typical 9.2 students, study and 
focus all the time and they don't actually learn anything. They study books all day and study the same 
thing over and over again and nothing really comes out of that. That is the potential in this. To solve the 
problem is not the same as problem solving. This is a process that this line projects out. 

Misery loves company. Remember, we are in the collective here, so it is social. Collaboration with others 
to temper frustration. They are projecting out: "I can solve the problem. I can concentrate." With that, 
they get the energy around them that others say, "Okay, we will join in that process of concentration." 
Remember that the logic process is a collective process, like a laboratory full of scientists all working on 
the same thing in order to solve the problem. Science generally is a collective process. Logic works in the 
collective field. 

Jupiter in detriment. The overwhelming need for expansion can lead to errors in judgment, missed 
opportunities and depression. The child that says, "But I study, why didn't I pass? I stared at it all day. It 
got my full attention. I was focused on it." That is the whole thing about the second line: what is projected 
out does not necessarily have the depth behind it. It is not introspective. It is just projecting out, "I can 
solve the problems because I can focus." That is not solving the problem. That's the way to solving a 
problem. 

9.3 The Straw that breaks the camels back 

This third line is an archetype like the 42.3. It is The overlooked minor element that always predetermines 
failure. Whenever you see the word failure or mistake in a third line, it is okay because this is exactly 
where it is supposed to be. It does not mean that there is anything terrible about that at all. It just means 
that for certain in this third line, this process of bonds made and broken, of trial and error, of learning 
from mistakes, is going to be accentuated. 

Earth exalted. The use of force to temporarily overcome impediments. In other words, the moment that 
something is not working in the concentration, to put even more concentration on it. 

On the other side: Persistent force that saps vitality and turns molehills into mountains. These people will 
always miss something. There is always a moment in which their concentration breaks. There is a 
moment that the concentration just simply is not there and, in that moment, you can take the wrong turn 
and go for a long detour. In that moment, you can just miss, literally, what is there. What is missed can 
become an enormous thing. 

It is the logic process that makes the word 'mistake' ugly. The abstract people do not care about mistakes. 
Crisis is part of their way of life. But logical people get very upset with mistakes. "One and one is not two 
but three." "No, two." It is this whole process of, "That is a mistake; you have to correct that." It has to be 
right because the logic process has to be consistently provable for the collective. Making a mistake in the 
logic process can create a lot of deep anxiety in logical people because the very nature of logic is to 

eliminate the mistakes so that we can know for certain. "What is this formula: E=MC2? Let's make it 
certain. We'd better check that out. Otherwise, we scratch this thing away because we are not going to put 
that into the world and predict naturally into the future with that, unless we can be certain that this 
foundation is correct." 

What happens here in the third line is the miracle of what logic always needs. Logic always needs the 
illogic of a mistake because out of this can come so many wonders. That moment where there is 
something that is missed, that moment that everything breaks down and is a failure, that moment can turn 
into an enormous success. The classic example is of the scientist who, in the moment of losing their 
concentration, allows something to get too hot and explode. Out of that explosion comes something 
wonderful and, "Wow, that is amazing. How did that happen?" It is illogical and that makes them very 
uncomfortable. 

In the white book: The loss of power through the failure to focus. It is gone. You lose it in that moment. 
The power is gone and you can't focus and then something will be missed because the concentration was 
not there. 

On the other side of this: The power to turn a focus into an obsession. Mature 9.3 people have learned a 
lot, like so many people that carry the third line themes in their life. They get to learn a lot because they 
make what other people consider a lot of mistakes. Out of all their mistakes they learn many things that 
others don't get to learn. 

9.4 Dedication 

We come to our line of externalization, our line of being fixed. These people are fixed on the resonance of 
the first line. They are fixed on problem solving, on providing their energy for the logical process. This 
energy is basically the energy to be able to lead and to guide others through the experimentation with the 
logical process. This will eventually go all the way up to the leadership channel, the channel of being an 
alpha. So, it is about the process of gathering energy in order to guide humanity through understanding. 

This line is called Dedication. Regardless of the pressures or stress, the disciplined attention to detail. 
These people are fixed on being focused. These are people that must concentrate. 

Moon exalted. Right action that leads inevitably to actualization. Right action being the action to 
concentrate. This is what these people are there for: to live out clearly this fixed one way. Concentration 
is their way. Mars in detriment. The persistent urge to want to skip essential steps. In other words, I have 
concentrated enough. Now I want to act. This is not an awareness that can decide that. 

You have two sides of this in the white book: The power to act on the potential of the focus; or The drive 
for action that ignores the details. This need to generate: keep in mind that the logic process is under so 
much stress because it does not have easy access to energy. The people who carry the logical energy gates 
feel this enormous pressure on them to release their energy because the rest of the logical process wants it 
so that they can do their experiments and can actually lead and guide. There is a great deal of stress in that 
sense on the concentrating field from others. 

Remember, again: collective and social in this context. The key in that is that they have this power and 
they are externalizing this power. These are the people that help other people concentrate. If you have five 
kids studying together and one of them has the 9.4, the moment that one of them says, "Let's take a break 
and listen to some music," it will be the 9.4 that is saying, "No, we are here to focus and concentrate. 
We'd better get this done." Logic is collective. They have that power to keep everybody focused on that 
logical process. 

9.5 Faith 

This fifth line is so perverse. It is one of the most perverse lines in all of the I'Ching. It is very bizarre. We 
know that the fifth line is a line of universalization and we know that the fifth line, in the resonance to the 
second line, rather than projecting outwards is being projected upon. Look at the keynote of this line. It 
says, Faith. Faith has nothing to do with the logic process. This is a projection from the outside onto 
people who obviously have a concentrative skill. The projection from the outside is, "We have faith in 
them because they are concentrating. We have faith that the doctors will find a cure to... because they are 
concentrating on..." But, like the student that does not learn anything, they may not figure it out either. 
Nonetheless, this brings an element of the belief system into the logical process. It is, in that sense, that I 
call it perverse because this is very strange. 

As an overview: The trust that detailed adherence will lead to fulfillment. In other words, if you really 
concentrate, you will really get it. Well, maybe. This is after all the projection coming from the outside. 
The people who get that projection put on them are under all kinds of pressure to be able to fulfill that. 
Jupiter exalted. Loyalty to the letter of the law. That is, "You concentrate. You do not take off from that." 

Then this wonderful line in the black book: Earth in detriment. Like the mystery of God, doubt 
engendered through the perceived illogic of a process. "How can I have faith that I will find the solution 
when all I know to do is how to concentrate? There is something bizarre in all these people putting their 
faith and trust in me; just because I can stare all day does not mean that I will come up with a viable 
solution." In that, it brings an energy of doubt: "Is this all I have to do? Just concentrate?" Of course, it 
isn't. 

The power to focus and bring value to concentration; or Where the lack of power to concentrate leads to 
doubt. This strange abstract concept stuck in the middle of how we universalize the energy to be 
concentrated. If you have two kids and one of them studies and the other one never studies, and you ask 
their parents which one do they think is going to pass and do well, the parent that has the child that 
studies says, "I have faith that they will do all right. They are doing their work." The other parent says, 
"No, I do not have any faith because they are not concentrating." That does not mean that the one who 
does not concentrate fails and the concentrated one succeeds. This is the whole irony of this and this is 
why it brings doubt. It brings doubt because this is only an aspect in a very complex collective process of 
establishing logic in the world. 

9.6 Gratitude 

The sixth line is a very beautiful line because it carries with it a quality that you do not often see which is 
the quality of joy. There is joy that is clearly evident in the 9th and in the fifth hexagram as well. This is: 
The joy which comes with accepting small rewards for small victories. The real beauty of concentration is 
that it is there to provide power to solve something, to bring something ultimately into a fact. Each step 
along the way is really a value. As long as one is clear about what one is focused on, there can be 
enormous joy in that process, but we know the limitation of the sixth line, which is: there must be more to 
all of this. 

The greatest problem that sixth line logical people here have is that they are trying to look at the final 
solution, where everything has been worked out and the formulas have been established so they can say, 
"I will work for that. I will concentrate on that and get my joy out of getting there." But you cannot know 
in the logical process that you actually will get there. This line in the black book comes from an old 
Chinese saying, A journey of a thousand miles begins with the first step.' If you take the first step in 
agony, in anticipation of the rest of that journey, if you think that you will only take that first step, or that 

you cannot go to the end of that journey, you will never start on that road. This is the essence for the 
logical process. 

For the sixth line here, it is not about whether I can get to that final step or not; it is whether or not I can 
find joy in each step. They will not take that step and they will not concentrate unless each step is a joy. 
This is what it is all about for them. They have to have joy in this focus and concentration in their life. It 
has to make them feel good, not the solution but the process. After all, this is what it is all about. This is 
all about providing essential energy for a logical process and not for the solution. 

Pluto in detriment, No single step is of value until the journey is over. If there is no joy in each step, they 
will not get into it. They just won't and they learn that very quickly and then they start pulling back and 
they do not give their energy for the logical process. 

In the white book: Moon exalted. The power to enjoy the concentrating process. The Moon is bringing 
that quality out. The moment you see the Moon connected to a line, you know that this line is going to 
have a cycle. It is rising from a low to a peak and back to a low in its cycle and you know that you will go 
through all of these aspects. Somebody who has the Moon here exalted, at the beginning of their lunar 
cycle, that can be like the no-moon phase. They don't really enjoy it and the next day they enjoy it a little 
bit more and so on, until they reach a peak and then they start sliding down the other end. Logic is about 
repetition and it can get boring. 

The other side is: The energy for expression that cannot find joy in the process until it is complete. In the 
logic process, here is the ultimate joke: it is never complete. There will be people who will check out the 
Human Design System for as long as there are people who check out anything logically, whether or not 
generation after generation says that logic works. That is my old joke: when I was a student studying 
science, I had to do all these old formulas. Those formulas have been checked for hundreds of years, over 
and over again. The joke is, whenever I read in my favorite scientific journals that some old formula that 
everybody thought was cast in concrete and somebody found a mistake. The other day, they just 
discovered that they think that light actually has two different speeds, depending on where you are 
standing. According to Einstein, there is only one speed of light. Formulas never get trusted and, of 
course, that is the joke here. This is very deeply depressing. 

If you really think that the only way that you can commit yourself to a logical process is if you know that 
it will bring about the correct answer, you never know. You cannot know and when you have it in your 
hand. You still can't let go off the fact that it is always going to be open to what is natural in the logic 
process: criticism, the need to correct, the need to make sure that it is perfect, the need to lead with it. All 
this is necessary for working in the logic process. The faith of the fifth line comes in here. You have to 
trust every single step because it is never complete. It is part of that illogical process that lies here at the 
beginning of this. There is no guarantee of logic. There is nothing but this quality of faith which logical 
people, at their core, do not want to have to deal with. It is okay for a believer to say, "I believe that we 
will have a cure for AIDS." That is very nice, but that is not the same as a logical person's attitude 
towards the very same phenomenon because the logical person says that it is possible that a cure for AIDS 
can be found. But we have to do our research and we have to check it out and do our experiments. The 
perfect joke is: when you get to the sixth line here, the next hexagram is the fifth hexagram, first line, and 
that is exactly where the 9 goes in the circuitry. 

HEXAGRAM 10 TREADING 

We come to this place in which the Vessel gets poured out, the 10th gate. It is by far the most complex of 
all the Vessel gates. It is a gate that provides the identity to the integration process. By the nature of their 
mechanics, the integration gates are more complex. The 10th gate is preceded in the wheel by the 25.6. 
Whatever 

When we come to the 10th gate, we come to the gate of our nature. In that sense, we come to a gate of 
being in the world. The most powerful conditioning gate is the 10th gate. It conditions the behavior of the 
world through a very complex system, but the whole business of the 10th gate is the question that is 
raised in the 25.6 which is how does one live life as an expression? How does one express innocence in 
life? How does one express one's rhythm in life? How does one express the existential quality necessary 
for being in the experience of life? All that is focused on the 10th gate because it is out of this gate that 
the Vessel of Love is poured into each and every one of us, as an individual process. 

We are all conditioned by this individual process of the 10th. gate. The 10th gate represents the possibility 
to love oneself. In that possibility, the ground or the framework of loving oneself is to love being in the 
world because the 10th gate is about living in the world. It is about being part of the life process. 

Above the 10th gate in the black book, it says, The underlying code of behavior... Code here is a genetic 
catch phrase, if you will. We have a code of behavior that is imprinted in us at a very early moment, 
inside of us, in the structure of the form that we are going to be endowed with, something that we could 
see when we were looking at the first 88 degrees of the sun. ...which ensures successful interaction 
despite circumstances. Everything about behavior is what makes life easier. The moment that you are not 
being yourself, life is automatically going to be more difficult for you. The more you are being yourself 
the stronger your capacity for survival in this life, regardless of the circumstances. To be yourself is the 
great success and when the 10 is connected to the 20, to be yourself is the opportunity to be awake: to be 
awake in the now in the world. 

This whole business about a code of behavior is something very important when you do analysis. You 
have come to understand how the structure of a hexagram and the thematic or the keynotes associated 
with each of the lines work, so you know that first lines are introspective and so on. What is important is 
to recognize that every single line in its structure also has a code of behavior. In other words, each line 
has its code of behavior which can be seen in the 10th gate. If you want to understand the nature of fourth 
lines, look at the behavior of the 10.4, The Opportunist. Then you can see the opportunism built into all 
fourth lines. That is the correct behavior: to wait for that opportunity, to wait for that moment in which 
you are able to effectively externalize your influence. If you are a second line and everybody can look 
inside of you, it means to be a hermit, to be careful about those who can penetrate into you and take you 
away from your nature. In other words, in order to look at and to understand the nature of any given line, 
you can also see that, not only do you have a keynote for its structure, but more than that, you have a 
built-in reference in which you can see the code of behavior that bests suits that particular line. That code 
of behavior for the lines is very important to keep in mind when you are doing somebody's chart. 

Think of the nature of genetic continuity. In genetic continuity, we know that lines in similar positions in 
the structure have a deep relationship to each other. From the basic teachings of Human Design, we know 
that, as a global entity, we live inside of an emotional environment which is generated by all the solar 
plex combinations. We know that out of the solar plex will come the ultimate recognition of the spirit of 
humanity. Think about the nature of that Spirit in terms of how it functions in the world. The 22. 1 is 
called Second class ticket. This is one of the things that human beings deeply feel at the foundation of 
their nature, which is that somehow they are all given second class tickets; somehow they do not get the 

opportunity to belong or fit in to a place where they think they deserve to be. Think of that genetic 
continuity as it applies to the 10.1. 

10.1 Modesty 

The line is called Modesty. I have a nickname for this line. I call this line the line of the chameleon. Do 
not confuse it with Modesty in the 15, but understand that the nature of this line is that it asserts not an 
ego, but its selflessness. In doing so, what is there is the overview: An innate sense to know and accept 
one's place. Everything about being a human being is about being within a hierarchy. There are those 
above. There are those below. There are those more successful and those less. It is always the way that it 
is going to be. This is the nature of the world. The 10.1, the correct behavior, is simply to accept one's 
place. That is all, nothing more, nothing less. I have had a real privilege in my life. I have Jupiter in the 
10.1. I am comfortable and have been comfortable with princes and I am just as comfortable with freaks 
and I have lived in all kinds of environments. Inherent in the 10.1 is the acceptance of one's place, 
wherever that place happens to be. 

The Sun exalted. A valued sense of purpose, no matter what the position. In the acceptance of one's place 
is a sense of valued purpose. Everybody is looking for their purpose. The purpose lies in fulfilling your 
behavior, in being yourself. All the themes of love are pointed at the same thing over and over again: to 
be yourself, to accept what it is to be in the world and to accept that the world is both a hard and easy 
place. Only then is there a sense of purpose. 

The Moon in detriment. The affliction of over-sensitivity and hurt feelings. Everything about the self is 
under risk from the outside. The self is always under risk from the outside. The self by its nature is 
selfless. It is not ready to make any claims and yet, the moment that it is connected to the outside, the 
outside pressures and conditions it to take responsibility for its nature. 

Think about the 10.1 child. I have two of them so I know: the 10.1 is always acting correctly even if you 
do not like it. Always. The moment that you try to tell them that they are not acting correctly, you deeply 
offend them and they suffer from hurt feelings, of course, because inside of them, genetically, they know 
(this is all about knowing) that their behavior is correct. 

In the white book. The ability to know one's place and how to act despite circumstances. This is the 
answer to having a second class ticket. So what? Sit in second class, so what? I get on airplanes across the 
Atlantic Ocean and there are all those people in first class. I have a second class ticket. What to do? I will 
not complain and whine that I don't have a first class ticket. I have a second class ticket. Sit in second 
class. Accept your place. It is hard for human beings to just accept what the gods have dished out for 
them. It is the only way. This is the correct behavior and it is the foundation of all behavior. It is the 
foundation of the behavior that creates perfected form. It is the foundation of the behavior for the 
perfection of conviction. It is the foundation of the behavior to be awake. Accept your place. 

10.2 The Hermit 

Here in the 10th gate you have a theme of behavior, a code of behavior for all second lines which is being 
The Hermit. The overview says: The successful side-stepping of behavioral requirements... ('Behavioral 
requirements' is conditioning.) ...through isolation. We have seen in our work together that all second 
lines tend to suffer from the fact that they don't know that there is somebody who will burst in on them 
and see them and try to condition them because they can see into them. The hermit is the correct behavior: 
withdraw rather than accept conditioning away from what is your nature. 

Mercury exalted. Mental functions enrich aloneness. Mars in detriment. The angry exile. Whichever way 
that comes out, it is better to withdraw than to accept the conditioning. To be the hermit is so important. 
The other thing is: in the genetic continuity, as in the 12.2 Purification, The Hermit is somebody who has 
to rigorously withdraw from negative forces. That is the role of the behavior of the hermit: it is not simply 
to withdraw, but to withdraw from negative forces, not from all forces. Negative forces are those forces 
that apply conditioning and try to change the nature of the hermit, to bring the hermit out of his isolation. 

In the white book: Independent behavior through isolation, or Isolation to preserve independent behavior 
in the face of conditioning. That is the most important aspect of it because that is the real key to all second 
lines. The moment that somebody is trying to break in on your second line and condition you, withdraw. 
It is better for you to withdraw and be in your own process because this is what is healthy and it is the 
only way in which you are going to find love for yourself. 

Think about that. What happens is that when people recognize you for something and they pull on you, 
you tend to confuse that with love. It is not; nor should it be. That is, those people that can look into you 
and try to pull you, they try to pull you by getting you to recognize your nature and turn it into something 
motivated. They try to pump you up. This has nothing to do with the role of the hermit. The role of the 
hermit is to avoid such conditioning in order to have an opportunity to be awake. 

10.3 The Martyr 

We come to the story of the third line which is about martyrs. Think about the nature of what the third 
line is. It is always in a situation (lower trigram) in which it tries to get out of its process, only to be 
confronted by the outside. In the moment of being confronted by the outside, it is being forced to adapt 
because it was not prepared for what was there on the outside. In the nature of behavior, when you come 
to the third line, you come to trial and error in the process of behavior. Now, remember that third lines 
can lead to the sixth line of wisdom. That trial and error in behavior can be something that is of enormous 
value to humanity, but, at the same time, it is a trial and error process. What may be discovered by living 
out that trial and error is something else. It may turn out to be something that is of value. 

The Martyr overview line: The futile rejection of standards based on a just awareness. Futile rejection: it 
does not do any good to reject it. Here are human beings who, without choice, have a genetic code for 
behavior and that code of behavior, because it is trial and error, will often be in conflict with the behavior 
of those that surround it and meet it. No matter how much they live out their own nature, they are 
constantly going to meet resistance from those around them. Of course, it is not easy for them to give up 
that nature. It is, after all, what they are. 

The Earth exalted. The martyr as an enduring example whose behavior is ultimately enshrined. When a 
human being is living out their own nature, whether anybody likes it or not in the now, that has nothing to 
do with whether or not it is truly of value. The 10th gate is individual and deeply related in that sense to 
the first gate in the self, to its individuality. It speaks about this process of time, that as a creative process, 
to have different behavior than other people is not something that is recognized in your own time 
necessarily as a possible variation that others can follow. It simply may be seen as disruptive, anti-social, 
freakish and a threat, most of all. After all, behavior is the most important conditioning we get. It can be 
very threatening to have somebody whose behavior has impact on others and who becomes a role model 
(sixth line). 

The other thing is that, being individual, this is a behavior that can be mutative and can bring about 
change and most of all, individuals and individual aspects are always seeking attention. Therefore, the 
behavior of the 10 and the 10.3 is always getting attention: "You should not act like that, Johnny." "Stop 
picking your nose, Johnny." He may do it for the rest of his life until somebody slaps him in the face, 

until his behavior so violates the standards or the norms that somebody resists it. Remember, all of these 
gates of the self are always dependent on what they meet as beings on the other side. 

The Moon in detriment. The martyr complex. The active pursuit of martyrdom for personal 
aggrandizement. Here the ego is touched. These are people who make a living from their behavior. The 
way these people act in the world attracts attention and because of that, they maintain that behavior in 
order to continue to maintain that attention. 

In the white book: Behavior that is ultimately challenged by others. I tell all 10.3's when someone 
challenges them: "If it is your nature, martyr away because the more people resist you the better you 
know that you are living yourself." So many of these people have very thin skins and they are so easily 
upset by what other people say or comment on about the nature of their behavior. 

Often their reaction is going to the other side: Behavior as a way to attract attention. "If you don't like my 
behavior, watch me because I will not change it," and they use it to their advantage to attract attention. 
They can, they do, and they will. Then you see the impact on the self of having other forces come and 
impose on them and condition them. 

I taught you about the 10th gate being a conditioning factor for humanity and how important it is for 
humanity as a conditioning force, but that will give you a false impression. It is easier to generate the love 
of humanity than it is to generate the love of self. It is easier to generate the love of the body than it is to 
generate the love of self. It is easier to be one with universal love than it is to love oneself. The 46 always 
has to live with the conditioning of the 29 and its commitment. The 25 always has to deal with the 
conditioning of a willful ego. But the love of self, the behavior, gets conditioned in so many different 
ways. It gets conditioned by the sacral in terms of whether or not it even has the power to follow its 
convictions. It gets conditioned by the splenic system, an awareness that will condition the nature of the 
behavior. It gets conditioned by being able to deal with conditioning forces placed on it from all kinds of 
different directions. 

Obviously, when I speak in this language, I am not talking about the nature of one's finished design. 
Somebody like me who has the 10/20/57 but does not have the 34, the force that conditions my behavior 
is always going to come out of the 34. Somebody who only has the 10 will be open to all three of these 
conditioning forces. It is always dependent on the nature of somebody's design but understand the 
difficulty. The difficulty is to maintain one's nature. The little martyr that keeps sticking their finger in 
their nose, as disgusting as they may be to us, the more we try to beat that kid into not doing that, the 
more we try to tell them that it is bad for them, the more we try to stop them in the now, we are not 
benefiting them. What we are teaching them is to not let them be themselves. We are conditioning them to 
see that their behavior is repellent and that because their behavior is repellent, so are they. 

Now, it is not that I would like to have kids that stick their finger up their noses. I have been a teacher all 
my life and have been teaching kids. It is not something that I would like to look at but, then again, who 
am I to judge? All behavior, particularly in the first three lines, is under enormous pressure from society 
because this is society's way of counteracting the natural conditioning capability of the 10th gate. They 
condition it in return. To be oneself is the only way that you find self-love and there are so many forces 
that try to keep you away from that. 

When you have the 20 connected to the 10, you have a voice that says: "I am myself now." That voice is a 
joke because it is a voice that can say "I am myself now," but it does not mean that what they are doing is 
their self now or what they are processing is their self now. 

To be awake is simply about being yourself in the now and, regardless of what your behavior is, if you are 
a martyr, you have to be a martyr in the now and if you are a martyr in the now, you are awake. If that is 
your nature. If it is your nature to take the slings and arrows of everybody else's comments because they 
do not like your particular behavior, it is your nature and the moment that you succumb to that, you fail in 
this life. You will not love yourself. You will not be awake but asleep. 

One of the things about the nature of life is that life for a human being must involve a deep level of non- 
interference and recognition of the other. Everything about being awake is dependent on who is in your 
life. After all, most human beings are not manifestors of their behavior in the now. Most human beings 
are reliant on others in order to have that transpire. Most people who carry the 10th gate are not 
manifestors in the now. Most of them require other people in order for them to come about. It comes back 
to that very important standard that is established in the first line: to know and accept one's place means 
that you know the place not only for yourself but for others. 

You know who belongs in your place with you and you know whose place you belong in. This is about 
knowing the other. Everything about love is dependent on knowing the other. I have never known so 
much about myself. It is because I know so much about other human beings. It is out of this knowing that 
I have learned so much about the nature of who I am and, out of that, who belongs in my life and who 
does not. 

This is what it is all about for all of us, this deep recognition that we are not alone, that we are always in 
the aura of others and the auras of others are always conditioning us in one way or another. You have to 
be clear about your nature. You have to be clear about what is there so that you can be healthy, so that 
you can be of value to the totality and that you can enjoy being you in this life. So much of that is about 
understanding people. 

We are deeply misled in this life. That child with its behavior does not realize that it has a right to that 
behavior because everybody is opposed to it. It is not nurtured in that sense. To nurture that, all you do is 
that you do not interfere with it. You can educate. All anybody can do in this life is provide information, 
provide data to the other. 

I have learned as a teacher about the nature of what is called positive reinforcement. If you see something 
awful in somebody, wait until you can see something that is not. If you have a child that is always making 
mistakes, wait until they get it right. If you have a human being that is not themselves, don't take them 
into your life until they are. That is positive reinforcement and that is one of the things that we all need 
from each other and we can't get it until we get to a point where we understand each other. Understanding 
each other is what it is all about. 

With the information that you have in Human Design in terms of the nature of types, you have a way of 
encouraging people to live out their own nature. I do not pay much attention to generators when they 
initiate things with me. I expect manifestors to ask. My son is a generator so I make sure that I ask him to 
do things rather than telling him to do things so that he has an opportunity to respond because that is his 
nature. With the knowledge that you have and the people around you in your life, there are ways for you 
to deal with these people: encourage them to be themselves and then you don't become part of the 
problem by just mindlessly conditioning them even though you know better. This is very important. 

One of the main tasks that we have in our process is that, by recognizing and being aware of the other, we 
have to encourage them to be themselves. We have ways of doing that with the knowledge that we have. 
The more people we have that are living out their nature, that are encouraged to live out their own nature, 
the better and the healthier all of us are going to be and the better is the environment that all of us live in. 
One of the things to recognize about having the knowledge of the other is that you can encourage them to 

be themselves, not by telling them what to do and how to act but by the very recognition of their nature, 
by encouraging in the way you interact with them so that you don't become a conditioning force. You 
become a healing force. 

10.4 The Opportunist 

Dealing with the upper trigram, we have a different process at work because the fourth and fifth lines are 
rather gifted in the sense that they are going to recognize not only that there is one other source of 
conditioning, but that they are going to come to grips with all three other sources. In other words, the 
fourth and fifth lines of the 10th hexagram have deep transpersonal skills because they do have 
recognition of the impact of the other. 

The fourth line as a behavior is a code for all fourth lines for this one-tracked-ness, the fixedness. Its 
behavioral code is The Opportunist. The acceptance of norms until a successful transformation can be 
engendered. It is very important to understand that. The whole thing about the nature of the behavior in 
the fourth line is that it has to wait for its opportunity, which means that it cannot give up behavior until 
there is a place to go with that behavior. 

My analogy for this is: if you have a job and you are a 10.4 and you want a new job, you cannot quit your 
job until you have a new one. This is opportunism. You stay with the nature of your fixedness until there 
is an opportunity or you wait simply for that opportunity to externalize your fixedness. Again, there is 
always the possibility that the opportunist has enormous influence: to be able to wait for the right moment 
to act can often lead to a great deal of good fortune or success. 

We have this overview and so it takes time: the acceptance of norms until a successful transformation can 
be engendered. Accept the nature of your behavior until the behavior can really change. Somebody who 
has the 10.4 and is deeply conditioned and they come to Human Design. They are not going to be able to 
change their nature. They will not be able to change their nature until that opportunity is really there for 
them. That opportunity has to be there. For example, you are a generator and you are a 10.4. You cannot 
just suddenly become a generator. You have to wait for that opportunity when somebody says to you, 
"Excuse me, could you help me?" and you go, "Uh-huh." Then you can jump into that behavior: to wait 
for the opportunity. 

Uranus exalted. Transformation that is transcendence to a higher code. The whole thing about the 
opportunist is that you are looking for the opportunity to externalize your nature and that is the highest 
possible code. There is nothing higher. 

Mercury in detriment. Opportunism as a game and/or mental exercise. Most of that is because the 10th 
gate has no guarantee that it is going to have access to a motor in order to manifest. So often it is 
speculating on those moments of opportunity when they may not arrive, or they are the kind of people 
who think, "Here is a perfect opportunity to make a million dollars," but never do it because it is a game, 
and because they do not have within themselves, within the nature of their design, the real opportunity to 
live out that opportunism. 

In the white book: The maintaining of behavioral patterns until the right moment and opportunity for 
transformation. It is so important for 10.4's just to sit back and wait for that moment to live out their 
nature. The other side: Altering one's behavioral patterns in order to take advantage of opportunities. It is 
the same thing, just on the other side but it is also speculative. It is waiting for those opportunities and 
they may not be ready to do that at that moment. Remember, not everybody who has the 10.4 is going to 
be a manifestor or a generator. They may not have the opportunity to act it out and then it becomes 
something game4ike or speculative. 

One of the really clear genetic continuities is between the 28.4 and the 10.4. The 28.4, as any fourth line, 
is all about holding on. It is a holding on until the opportunity to take a risk: to hold on to what you have 
got until you really have that opportunity to go beyond that. 

It is so important to see that the 28.4 and the 10.4 are both deeply risk-oriented and the whole thing is that 
one cannot afford to take that risk until one waits for the right moment. Any premature action in that 
sense is going to lead to difficulties. So, the genetic continuity there is very important. This 28.4 is 
holding on and usually for the betterment. In other words, if you hold on and wait for that opportunity, it 
is always going to be more beneficial. If a 28.4 does not hold on, that does not mean that it fights for the 
wrong things; it fights for the right things at the wrong time. 

10.5 The Heretic 

The 10.5 has enormous impact on society. After all, the 10 is part of Integration and Integration is the 
backbone of being in the body, of being individuated. The 10.5 is where society projects onto behavior 
and onto how it wants to see behavior. Society sees the behavior at its most interesting as being heretical. 
It is society that sees if your behavior is unique and individual and it in fact may be dangerous to the 
whole. All fifth lines are at one time exciting and at another time a threat to society because it is the 
source of society's projections and, therefore, can be the source of society's disappointment if those 
projections fail. 

When you come to the fifth line, you come to The Heretic. As an overview line it says: Direct and overt 
challenge to norms. One of the things to realize about the 10.5 is the need of society for a heretic, for a 
behavior that will challenge the norms. It is society that creates The Heretic, that creates The General, that 
creates all of these roles: The Savior, The Saint, all of these figures. It is society that creates it out of its 
own needs and its owi4 projections. The heretic is created by society because they project onto the 
behavior of the 10.5 that it is either very exciting or very threatening. 

Jupiter exalted. The ability to succeed through the understanding and expression of higher principles. 
Mars in detriment. The burning 0~ie stake. What exactly is the difference? There is a profound difference. 
Remember that the fifth line is there to challenge the norms of society. In the white book: Principled 
behavior which directly challenges tradition. This is not a challenge to the way an individual acts in the 
world. This is not going up to somebody who has a rooster haircut and picking on them because they have 
a rooster haircut. This is not dealing with tradition. This is just dealing with unusual behavior. 
When you look at the other side, the Mars side: Behavior which directly challenges behavior and is 
eventually punished. If you go up to the punk and say, "This is ridiculous, nobody should walk around 
like this", don't be surprised if they rearrange your face. 

The fact of the matter is that the heretic is at its greatest when they attack the framework of behavior that 
has to be changed. Because the 10.5 is the vanguard of changing behavior, if they just attack the behavior 
on the surface they are the ones that suffer. They get burned at the stake because it becomes very 
personal. They are here to try to challenge the underlying tradition. If they do that, ultimately, they can be 
regarded as a very special force in the world. 

How they are going to react is again subject to the conditioning that they receive themselves. The 10.5 
that has no fuel and no access to awareness or no access to manifestation is always going to be 
conditioned by others. A 10.5 being conditioned by somebody else's awareness may end up attacking 
somebody's behavior and being punished for it simply because they were conditioned that way, rather 
than that being the most natural and healthy way for them. It is a very important line because, again, 

society has been calling for this. It is calling for a heretic that will challenge tradition and, in challenging 
tradition, provide mutation for behavior. 

Very interesting is the genetic continuity here, particularly because the genetic continuity as seen through 
the mystical process is the relationship between the 10.5 and the 49.5. The 49th gate is a gate of being the 
sacrificer and the sacrificed. It is the gate of emotional principles and the fifth line in its exalted form is 
about providing practical provisions for revolutionary times, in the same way that the heretic really brings 
something very practical when they deal with the tradition itself. That is what they are equipped to do: to 
look at the tradition and to see whether or not a tradition deserves to stand or whether or not it is time for 
mutation of behavior. 

Practical provisions: in the detriment of the 49.5 you have the same Mars in detriment, which is all about 
power. The moment that you make things personal is the moment that you get into a power trip with 
people. For example, you say to them, "Your behavior stinks," and they return, "Your behavior stinks." 
Nothing productive will come out of that. In order to change the behavior of society, what has to be dealt 
with and challenged is the underlying tradition out of which that behavior has risen. Practical provisions; 
otherwise expect to be sacrificed. 

10.6 The Role Model 

If you will look in this life for people that are the most self-conscious, you will find them in the 10.6. 
They are constantly under pressure, constantly self-concerned about the nature of their behavior. Built 
into them is the understanding that behavior can be hypocritical. They recognize that. The line is called 
The Role Model. 

A very powerful line: The perfect expression of the norms through action rather than words. They learn 
their self-consciousness well with their harmony to the 20.3, Self-awareness, or through the 57.3, 
Acuteness. They learn to recognize very quickly in their life that it is possible to say things but not 
necessarily possible to live them out. They see that very early. They recognize within themselves that 
their behavior is very important. But no matter how much they want to be able to behave perfectly, they 
always run into obstacles because they end up being conditioned by the people around them that they are 
dependent on. Even the words can only come out if there is a connection to the 20 and the awareness can 
only guide it if there is a 57 and the energy is only there if there is a 34. 

Remember that sixth lines look to the whole circuit, but the first thing a 10.6 looks at is Integration. It 
says, "How can I maintain the holiness of myself. How can I guarantee my survival in the world? How 
can I be me? How can I do what is right for me to do in the world?" All of that ends up being dependent 
on so many other beings. 

Pluto exalted. The constant example that refocuses the complacent on the basic integrity of set behavior. 
They know how important behavior is. If you have a 10.6 parent, you will discover that, while they are 
picking their nose, they tell you, "Don't pick yours: bad behavior." 10.6's recognize that correct behavior 
is very important. What is frustrating is that, because they know that better than anybody else and because 
so often they can't live it out, they would rather not be seen. They would rather sit on the roof and not be 
anybody's example because, even though they can be hypocritical, they suffer a great deal from their own 
hypocrisies. 

The other side of this is Saturn in detriment. The hypocrite. Do as I say, not as I do. We have seen this as 
a gift in all sixth lines: the 40.6 that sits on top of the house and looks to its family and says, "I see who is 
messing things up here," and can easily point it out. The 10.6 has this deep capacity to point out to you 
what is the correct behavior. By the way, I tell these people: go ahead. Tell other people how to behave. It 

is part of your gift and don't feel self-conscious because you yourself can't act the way you tell other 
people to act. Everybody has to accept their limitation, whatever it happens to be. This 10.6 leads to the 
20.6, to the line of wisdom. There is an enormous potential here to be awake to the beauty of self, but this 
is not an easy process. 

In the white book: The enduring value of expression of the Self through action rather than words. In the 
end it all comes down to the same thing. It comes down to how you live in the world. The only action that 
matters, whether it is action that you generate or manifest or whether it is action that is conditioned as 
manifestation or generation in your life, it that you cannot be taken away from your nature. As long as 
you are not taken away from your nature, you are an example for others. This is the great value of the 
10th gate and, as an example for others, you are a source of wisdom for them in their lives. 

Of all the sixth lines that we have looked at, none makes a more beautiful turn than the 10.6 because the 
10.6 goes to the 58.1. It goes to The Joyous and it goes to the most beautiful line of the 384: the line of 
Love of life. In the end, the 10.6 must find for itself love of life and the vitality that comes from loving 
life. It is not the vitality that creates the love of life. It is the love of life that creabs the vitality. Th., 10.6 
sits up there and knows the correct behavior but it also knows that that behavior is what brings about the 
love - life and out of that love of life comes the power to correct the collective, comes the power to 
establish new patterns, comes the power to release the example in the world. Good luck. 

It always brings me back to where I started 1 1 years ago. When we go through this process of looking at 
the G center, it brings me back to my own mantra: You are unique. You have no choice. Love yourself. 
There is nothing else. There really is nothing else. 

HEXAGRAM 11 PEACE 

Above the lines of the Rave I'Ching it says: A harmonic condition in the individual or society that permits 
assessment before renewed action. Ideas generate the possibility for examination. They are not 
necessarily something to act on. 

This is in the channel of the searcher, the seeker, and it goes back to the pressure of the 47, Oppression, 
which is all about trying to find a way to make sense out of what it is to be in the world. Here we have the 
gate of ideas and the possibility: awareness to visualize a realization or not. This is visual memory of the 
left eye. 

Think about how the left eye works: it does not see everything. It sees just what is there in the wave. If 
you are a left-eye person and you go on a vacation and you stay in a place with a beautiful view and you 
love it very much, then you get home and somebody says to you, "What was it like?" When you describe 
it, there will be many things left out. 

There is a place in your wave and the part of what you saw that you really like is the part you hold on to. 
Then somebody who knows the place says, "Wait a minute. Wasn't there a river that went through there?" 
and you answer, "Oh yes, there was a river. Now I remember." It is in a wave. It is the awareness to 
visualize a realization or not and the awareness possibility is visual memory, and this is the left eye. 

The most important thing for people who have this gate is to recognize that these ideas, no matter what 
the configuration is, are always for others. They are going to be most successful when they recognize that 
because the moment they try to actualize their own ideas, they will end up with a lot of frustration and 
crisis in their life. 

11.1 Attunement 

This line is the foundation. It is the line of introspection and it is called Attunement. This is a line that 
resonates deeply through the abstract process. The serendipity of being in the right place at the right time. 
This is a resonance to the 46th hexagram whose theme is to recognize that one is in the right place at the 
right time. To be in the right place at the right time means that whatever idea you have is of value in the 
moment that you have it. This is important for these people to understand. 

The idea process is a gift. It is simply there. The ideas can always be there. Any idea at any given moment 
has its value, but not for you. It has its value as another, idea, as another perspective on the process. 

Moon exalted. The nourishment derived from being with those who share the same goals and aspirations. 
One of the great concerns of all first lines is whether or not their nature is going to be accepted by the 
other. Idea people are very concerned about whether anybody is going to have anything to do with their 
ideas, which is why idea people can be so fervent. The beginning of a belief system lies here in this gate 
in this line. 

In the white book: The gift of finding those who will value your ideas. This is the whole thing about idea 
people. They need to have others who say, "That is a great idea," whether that is a belief in something or 
not. They are looking for others who will share the idea because they know that it is not a fact and they 
know that it is not necessarily a truth. What they know is it is an idea. "Who else wants to go along for the 
experience? Maybe there is a crisis, but misery likes company. Lets all do it together." 

When you get to the other side you have: The sense that no one will value your ideas. This is the 
foundation of what ideas are all about: an idea is only of value it you can share it with others. An idea is a 

painful thing when nobody values it. This is the whole thing about idea people. They are constantly 
searching, not simply for a new idea, but they are searching for others who will share the idea with them. 
When I discuss the mystical channels, I talk about the 40/37 which is a mystical bridge; it is not mystical 
in itself. It is all about the search. It is all about curiosity. In many ways, it mirrors this collective channel 
of the 1 1/56. The 1 1/56 is deeply social. The opiate of the masses. A belief system is intended to explode 
out of a social environment where other people are there sharing the idea and saying, "Yes." As we well 
know, ideas can be very dangerous in this way. 

The lower trigram always has difficulty in terms of the other side. The lower trigram is more involved in 
understanding the nature of its own process and yet, here in this channel, through this gate, there is this 
enormous pressure to socialize because the ideas are of no value unless they are shared with others. 

11.2 Rigor 

The second line is a line of projection. This is the great line of boredom. Boredom is inherent in the idea 
process and this line is a great line of boredom due to the fact that it is extremely difficult to get anybody 
to pay attention to your ideas. You are projecting ideas out without the value of introspection. That is the 
first thing. 

This line is called Rigor. The recognition that without vigilance and risk, peace can lead to stagnation and 
collapse. Neptune exalted. The imagination applied to ensuring the understanding of achieved values. It is 
very important for these people to recognize that their ideas are much better kept within themselves 
because then they can lead to the fruit that is very creative. 

This is a very creative line; it has an enormous potential in terms of creativity. These are the bored artists. 
They are even bored with their own art at times because it depends on who is there in their life to 
recognize it with them. When they have a nice idea, the moment they try to project that out to others, 
others are bored. "That is not my idea. Don't bore me with that." It is very difficult for them to project 
their ideas out to others who say, "This is boring". It is much better for them to work with their ideas 
within themselves as an imaginative process. 

Mars in detriment. The resorting to factionalism to satisfy the ego's need for action. It is like sitting with a 
group of friends and bringing out exactly the idea that will cause three of them to end up in a big 
argument with each other while you sit back after throwing out the idea. Instead of them being bored, you 
have to watch them getting all cranked up, so you end up being bored. 

A sense of boredom overcome through the imagination; or Provoking with ideas to escape boredom. By 
the way, the only time that they are not boring is when they are cranking other people up. 

11.3 The Realist 

Whenever you get to a third line of an abstract process, remember, it resonates deeply to the emotional 
side. You are dealing with bonds made and broken. You are dealing with an emotional wave in which 
contact is being made and broken and The Realist is about the nature of ideas itself. 

The acknowledgement that peace is transitory. This is the nature of the format energy that runs a circuit. It 
is called beginnings, middles and ends. Ideas are transitory. Pluto exalted. The internal renewal to 
maintain strength and alertness. Venus in detriment. The tendency to appreciate harmony to the point of 
delusion. The belief that beauty is eternal. Fiddling while Rome burns. What is so classic about third lines 
is not only that they make bonds and break them, but they can be very irresponsible in all that. This is the 
great irresponsible idea machine. 

The realization that ideas come and go. These are people where ideas are always coming and going and, 
due to that, there is a part of them that will never take any of them seriously. They may produce 
absolutely brilliant ideas. It is others that will take them seriously. They rarely take their own ideas 
seriously because ideas come and go. 

A pleasure in ideas that have no real application: Somebody who has an idea about flying to the alpha 
century to talk to the booboos. This kind of idea does not mean anything. "W uldn't it be a great idea to 
have a building that is 18 miles high?" These people love ideas that simply have no application 
whatsoever. It is just for the beauty of what an idea is. 

After all, we have an enormous privilege to have this kind of consciousness. The horror of this is when 
we take all that stuff seriously. The moment you take ideas seriously, there will be crisis. In this 
irresponsibility lies this enormous beauty of what the idea itself is. You do not have to do anything with 
it. You don't have to have anybody agree with you. It is just the beauty of what an idea can be. It can be 
infuriating to others, particularly when it is your parent. You have all these ideas and they say to you, 
"You must do something with it." One day you have the idea to be a plastic surgeon on Mars and then you 
end up being an agriculturist in Thailand because the idea changed. Ideas come and go. When you have a 
lover with this line who tells you, "let's go on vacation tomorrow," don't pack. 

11.4 The Teacher 

When you get to the fourth line and the upper trigram, something very special happens here. After all, this 
channel is intensely social and there is enormous frustration in the first three lines about not really being 
successful at crossing the line to get to the point of stimulation in the 56th gate in order to find the 
believers. In this line, we come to externalization and to this very fixed one-track process. Here it is very 
fixed on a single idea and very fixed on its ability to look across and know how to stimulate. 

There is a quality and a capacity here to stimulate. This line is called The Teacher. It is one of several 
lines that have more than two planets fixing it and so it is unusual in that nature itself. 

The ability to express the essential nature of peace. Remember that the tradition of the teacher has been 
based on teaching the ignorant. They have to believe first. When you are teaching a child and it has no 
real experience in the world, it cannot know or understand what you are teaching. It has to believe you 
first until it finds out for itself. Most of us come to a point in our lives where, through teachers, we always 
found disillusionment. 

What we were asked to believe from the teachers in our lives, our parents or our formal teachers, in many 
circumstances, we came to the point of disillusionment, that what we thought we were being taught was 
of value, instead turned out to be an illusion. The reality is that it is the tradition of the teacher is to first 
get them to believe. This is a very Piscean field and we are going through a process where this is 
changing. 

Moon exalted. The sage who in the extreme can teach harmony to the tone deaf. Venus is also exalted. 
The ability to reach out and touch the alienated. Finally, the Sun in detriment. The guru whose most 
valued wisdom is intentionally limited to a few. 

In the Book of Letters, it is very clear: Concepts which are clear and transferable. Ideas that can attract 
and inform the uneducated. These are great missionaries. All religious dogma is here. This is the gate of 
white magic and these are the great exponents of white magic: narrow minded, locked in their own track 
and, though they can be brilliant, they can also be very dangerous because they have the power to attract 

the other side. They have the power to get others to say, "I believe". This is one of most dogmatic of all 
gates and this is the nature of white magic. If everybody believes, Tinkerbell won't die. 

Ideas that can only be grasped by a few This is the nature of the guru in the sense that there are only some 
who are capable of understanding. The best example is Einstein because he wrote this theory of relativity 
in 1904 nearly a hundred years ago now and there are still maybe three of four thousand people on earth 
who understand anything of it. This is information intentionally limited to a few. There are only some 
people who are able to grasp it. 

This is also the most dangerous of the gurus. These are the people that really attract a fringe and only that 
fringe can understand that they are an reincarnation of Jesus Christ and the world is coming to an end and 
"Let's die tomorrow while we take poison." This can be a line that is devastating in its power because it is 
in this line that the capacity of the modern human mind awakened. 

I taught many of you that we had a throat chakra mutation that took place 80,000 to 90,000 years ago. 
That mutation took place in the 12.4. Exactly opposite that line in the zodiac is the 11.4. This opened up 
the whole possibility of the mind and the possibility to begin the process of articulating ideas. This has 
had enormous influence in the world ever since. Anybody who is born with either the Sun/Earth or the 
nodes in the 11.4 has the 12.4 on the other side and this is the line of the prophet. This is a very powerful 
opposition. It has caused as much pain as it has caused glory. That is its nature. "Believe in me and you 
shall be redeemed." 

11.5 The Philanthropist 

When you come to the fifth line you, always come to the complete expression of the hexagram. You come 
to a line of universalization. This gives you the best quality for the nature of this hexagram. It is called 
The Philanthropist. 

The motiveless nurturing of the disenfranchised to ensure harmony. Mercury in detriment. The 
withdrawing from direct contact, where giving is a form of defense. The philanthropist is about giving 
away your ideas. One side of this is philosophic and humanitarian ideas, ideas that may be of value to 
others because the most important ideas are those that enable us to share the human experience and to be 
a guide for others. 

On the other side of this are often people who end up being philosophical writers. This is classic for the 
philosopher: "Don't come near me personally but let me give you my ideas through a book or a movie." 
That way of doing it is away from the individual contact. Whenever I see anybody who has this line, I 
always give them a simple thing to think about: when somebody is bothering them, they can give them a 
good idea. "Why don't you go out and play, Johnny?" Give them an idea and send them away. That is 
what the defensive part is all about. 

By the time you get to the fifth line, you realize that the whole nature of having the 11th gate is that how 
the idea comes out is never up to you. It is always up to the other side because the 56 is manifesting it. 
There is this sense of, "I can be very philanthropic. I have a wonderful idea for you." That can be 
something that is very beneficial or it can be something that is very protective. 

11.6 Adaptability 

When you come to the sixth line, you come to the roof of the house. You come to transition and this line 
speaks of transition. It is called Adaptability. The inner balance to accept transition. 

Neptune exalted. The innate awareness that all forms are transitory. This is the resonance to the third line, 
The Realist. The Realist begins this process and recognizes that ideas come and go. This is more than 
that. It is the expression of ideas. After all, the sixth line goes far beyond what is there in the channel. It 
goes to the whole experience of the circuit. It is looking beyond that to the nature of life itself. What it is 
looking at is 'the innate awareness that all forms are transitory'. 

Jupiter in detriment. Adaptability in its most negative manifestation. The speculator who profits at the 
expense of others in times of peace or war. The greatest difficulty for idea people is to live out their own 
ideas. The sixth line people have a sense for what the whole process is about. They can see when the 
crisis is coming. They can see where the beginning of something is. They can be very lucky in the stock 
market. They can see when something is coming to an end and they can be very lucky in terms of getting 
in and out of things. 

Something lies within them that allows them to take the moment and capture it and to be able to profit 
from their idea in that moment. But their idea is not about manifesting in the throat. That idea is far 
beyond that. It is seeing how something operates throughout the whole collective process and being able 
to catch it and take advantage of it. They realize that any old idea won't do that. Ideas come and go and 
they are changeable. 

The realization that ideas lead to change and are changeable; or The realization of what idea is of value in 
any situation. It is the situation that these people look at, not the manifestation; it is the whole situation. 
They are tuning into that whole possibility. What is actually going on there and what idea can really work 
in that? Many people will take offense at these people, obviously. They always take advantage in certain 
situations with an idea, and ideas are not truths. Due to that, other people can see themselves as being 
taken advantage of. That is always the dichotomy that exists. 

The sixth line is going towards the 10.1, which is all about behavior. That is why what it is looking for 
over the roof is how everybody acts. Out of seeing the way in which the world behaves, they get their 
ideas of how they can take advantage of that behavior. 

I don't mean to make that negative. That is not moralistic. Please understand me. It is simply that they 
take advantage for their own benefit. All those ideas are supposed to be for others. In the detriment the 
idea is really for you. By the way, you ask these people, for example, "How did you know when to step 
out of the stock market. How did you get this idea?" They cannot really tell you. They tell you something 
that does not really sound related at all to the question. They simply tell you, "Well, women's' dresses are 
shorter this year." Whether you consider that answer as their real idea or as something that just flashes 
into their mind makes no difference. 

After all, we have no choice in what we say anyway. The speculator is born with this gift and has the 
experience. The people who have the gift end up in situations surrounded by people who do not have the 
gift. They follow their trends. The world is filled with people who try to figure out how Mr. Buffet made 
his 16 billion dollars. When you hear him talk about it, it is a joke. These people have the gift of 
comparison. They wouldn't tell their mother if they knew what stock to buy because they would be afraid 
that their mother would tell their friend and ruin the whole thing. 

HEXAGRAM 12 STANDSTILL 

The 12th gate is the only social channel for the individual process and, as such, the only way in which the 
individual mutation can go out into the world. This gate opens up to the solar plex center, so it is under 
the same pressure as the 35. It is under the pressure of the solar plex wave. Everything having to do with 
the 12th gate has to do with the nature of its voice which says, "I know I can try if I am in the mood." 
This is the whole key to the 12. 

Above the lines it says: The quality of restraint and the importance of meditation and inaction in 
confronting temptation. The 12 has to be restrained until it is in the mood. This gate is a stop. "I am not in 
a hurry here. I'll wait until I am in the mood." This is the key to everything that I will describe about the 
nature of the 12th gate and how it operates. 

12.1 The Monk 

The first line speaks for a hexagram and this first line is called The Monk. This gate is not called 
Standstill for nothing: this is about the monk. This is about being isolated. It is one of the three gates of 
aloneness and is about waiting and being contemplative. It is about restraint until one is in the mood, then 
it is the right time. 

Withdrawal that can only be maintained with communal support. Venus exalted. The beauty and harmony 
possible beyond the reach of temptation. The temptation lies in the solar plex center and in actually 
committing oneself to trying to explain oneself. Remember, the 12th gate is part of individuality. It is a 
knowing gate and every time that it makes a social contact, it has to be able to explain itself. If you are 
away from the social power of the solar plex center, you never have to explain yourself. That can be very 
peaceful. During that time, one can go through that process, allow the time for mutation to take place and 
wait for that moment of mood so that it can be externalized. 

In the detriment you have: Simon the Stylite,... These were people in the late Greco-Roman times in the 
Middle East whose religious practice was to climb up on these very tall pillars and sit up there by 
themselves. This is about ...total and often absurd withdrawal. 

In the white book: The expression of social withdrawal and its value when supported by others. In other 
words, if you are a 12 and somebody says, "Do you want to come and see me now? We have friends in 
the house," and you say, "I am not in the mood," they have to be able to accept that that is your nature so 
that at some further date, you'll be invited again. That is the need for communal support, in that sense. 

The other side: The absurd expression of social caution and extreme withdrawal from emotional contact. 
All of this is about bringing mutation. If you are not in the mood, you can't bring mutation. This is the 
intrinsic lesson of the 12. By the way, you will not be in the mood unless you have a mutation to bring. 
That is true as well. Mutation for an individual, at its simplest level, is the moment that you can explain 
an aspect of your knowing that has a mutative value. 

The moment that you can explain your knowing and you are in the mood, that is your opportunity to 
mutate others and bring them to a new knowing. That is part of how the process works. If somebody has 
the detriment of the 12.1 in an undefined throat, they may have extreme difficulty in being able to speak. 
This is a gate of articulation and the 12.1 people with the detriment in an undefined throat can even be 
mute, or they go through long periods in their life where they do not speak. 

12.2 Purification 

When you come to the second line, you come to projection. What is being projected out here is restraint 
that says, "leave me alone. I may not be in the mood, so why bother coming near me?" This line is called 
Purification. Rigorous withdrawal from negative influences. 'Negative' means from solar plex energy, 
before one is clear. "I know I can try, if I am in the mood." You can only get to the "I know I can try" 
when you can explain your knowing. That is the moment that the mutative capacity is there. 

Saturn exalted. The discipline to maintain a pure state. These are people who really are isolated human 
beings. They are always projecting out that they are not interested. They always project out that they do 
not want to have contact with the social aspect at the other end. Of course, they don't know that. This is 
about social mutation. It is a social channel. Remember, they are a second line so they do not really know 
what is underneath and how much they may get out of that moment of contact. 

Mercury in detriment. The boredom that arises out of lack of stimulation. Think about what these people 
are like. These people are restrained but they don't know why. Somebody says to them, "Why don't you 
come out tonight?" and they answer that they are not in the mood but they don't know if they are really 
not in the mood. They don't really know why they do not want to go out. They just say, "I am not in the 
mood." That is what they can put out all the time as a protective vibration. "I am not in the mood. I am not 
ready. I don't want to." But they do not really know why. They can get very confused by that. 

In the white book: The expression of disciplined social caution; or Caution that manifests boredom and 
the expressed desire for stimulus. These people constantly say, "No", but then they get very bored. We are 
dealing with a social channel here. There is a part of them that says, "Yes, but what am I going to do? I 
keep on going like this. There is nobody here." There is this sense of boredom that builds up underneath 
because they are not working on the mutative process. 

They are not coming up with their explanation for their knowing. That is the only moment that the 12 is 
free. It is a gate of articulation, literally, to be able to express the mutation. That means that you really 
have to be able to explain yourself, to bring it out into a social context. I am a classic 12.1. 1 have both my 
conscious and unconscious Uranus there. I did not go out into the world with the Human Design System 
until I was very clear about it. I lived like a monk, totally isolated, and the community supported it. These 
are classic patterns that go on all the time. 

12.3 Confession 

When we get to the third line of the 12th hexagram, we get to people who can be very deeply disturbed. 
Due to this bonds being made and broken, it is impossible for them to be always still. They are constantly 
stepping into the emotional energy of the solar plex center and, the moment that is connected, they go 
through this process of trial and error. This line generates hatred. These are people that hate or are hated 
and, mostly, the hatred in them is self-hatred. They end up hating themselves. This can be a very brutal 
line, a lot like The Martyr in the 10.3, which is part of the same individual process. These people can 
really be burned at the stake emotionally, which is another kind of scaring and burning. 

It is called Confession. The process of self-analysis. Neptune exalted. Whenever you see Neptune exalted, 
you know that you have quite a process to cut through all that murk, that it is not a clear process. The 
recognition of inadequacies and the purging of unjustified vanities. Every time this person makes contact, 
it is necessary for them to explain themselves. Remember that an individual has no business being social 
unless they can explain themselves. If they can't, they will get into a lot of trouble socially because, not 
only will they be rejected, but they will have to deal with the wave on the other side. What happens to 
these people is that they put that energy out and then they discover their inadequacies and they begin an 
adaptive process of learning. After all, if these people get through this process in a relatively healthy way, 

they have an enormous knowing within them about what really works and when they can bring out this 
quality of knowing within themselves. 

Mars in detriment. A perverse and often exaggerated self-hatred. I have met a lot of 12.3's who are so 
heavy on themselves. If you are a person like that, that is okay, but if you identify with being heavy on 
yourself, this is a tragedy. It takes years, 40 to 50 years, to go through all of this trial and error and to get 
to the point where you really can put across that explanation socially as a stranger and bring your 
mutation to others. 

In the white book: The expression of inadequacies in social interaction that leads to self-analysis and 
caution; or Inadequacies in social interaction that leads to the expression of self-hatred. You can't cure 
these people of their selfhated. It is not like you can say to them, "Now look, you have the 12.3 in 
detriment and it is a mechanic for your hating yourself, but do not take it seriously." That is very difficult 
to do. 

The thing for them to recognize about the nature of that is that there is a conditioning factor in this line in 
the black book: A perverse and often exaggerated self-hatred. This means not always. It does not say 
'always' which means that it is not fixed. This is the only thing that can work for them, to see out of that 
self -hatred that their failure of social interaction is not about them being inadequate. It is about them not 
having contact with the right forces. Again, it is a third line. It is not transpersonal. It really does not 
understand the emotional system on the other side and can only learn through experience, and usually 
painful experience. 

12.4 The Prophet 

When you get to the upper trigram, you get to the externalization of our mutative process. Here in the 
12.4, humanity had a mutation take place in the larynx 80 to 90,000 years ago that allowed us to begin to 
articulate in what we call language. The 12.4 is called The Prophet. The externalization is the ability to 
recognize (this is a transpersonal line) the emotional field on the other side, to be able to deal with the 
emotional field on the other side, in order to be able to get the mutation across. 

The ability to foresee and plan for the end of standstill. They are people that have the ability to foresee. 
They have been waiting all along and have the capacity inside of them to know exactly when the mood is 
right and to know exactly when they have the capacity to explain themselves. After all, what good are 
prophets when they cannot explain themselves? 

Earth exalted. The rousing of the stagnant for communal preparation. In the white book: The ability to 
foresee and express the need for social interaction and an end to caution. It is time to get the word out. It 
is time to get this mutation going because, without the emotional energy, it is not going to happen. 

On the other side, Mercury in detriment. The voice in the wilderness. In the 12.1, we have people that can 
have extreme difficulties in articulation and they can even be mute. In the fourth line, you have people 
with speech impediments. You have people who have difficulty in the way they articulate. 'The voice in 
the wilderness': it may be very hard for these people to speak. These are people that can stutter. These are 
people that can go through all kinds of difficulties in terms of articulation. 

The expressed need for social interaction that falls on deaf ears. It is very hard for these people to get their 
message across. Everything about the externalization process is about opportunity. Prophets show up 
exactly at the right time: when people are ready to hear their word. Otherwise, it does not work. This is 
about being totally fixed on that moment, waiting for that moment to be able to externalize one's 
explanation, one's mutation, and to try to bring about some kind of social transformation. 

12.5 The Pragmatist 

When you get to the fifth line, you have this wonderful word here: Pragmatist. This is the beauty of the 
fifth line. This is how the whole gate is projected on. It is projected on all 12th gate people that they are 
pragmatic, that they are cautious and that they are careful. This is what the outside sees. 

The success of restraint lies in not abandoning the lessons learnt when the phase ends. This immediately 
tells you something about this line: it is not like the second line. It really knows what is on the other, side 
and that the emotional energy comes and goes. It knows that each time that the energy is there, there is a 
period afterwards in which they are going to be alone and they stand still and they go through their 
process but they also know: that experience of the emotional system is coining again and they are ready 
for that. 

It is also projected onto these people that they are much more social than they are. Jiirgen is a classic 
example with the 12.5 and 22.5, a resonance in this channel. It is always projected on him that he is very 
social and accessible, but I know him very well. I know that when you hook into that, it will come out, 
but it is not necessarily the case. 

This is a projected field that people put onto others. What is so important about this fifth line is that, 
because they always get this social projection placed on them, they get a lot of experience. If they are 
clear each time about the nature of that experience, they finally are people who have very special social 
skills because they know when to be in the mood and how to interact when they are in the mood. 

Sun exalted. Light is always conscious of darkness. Mars in detriment. The tendency to remember only 
the most painful lessons learnt. This side of that energy can be, "Yes, I learned a lot about this social 
interaction but there is a lot in it that I don't really like." They get to see that the social mechanism of the 
individual is not always pleasant, even if you can explain yourself. There are forces that are not worth 
dealing with. 

In the white book: Caution as an expression of social experience; or Caution which is conditioned by the 
most painful social experiences. One of the things about fifth lines is that if you really get to them, they 
remember the most painful lesson. They remember that type of hook and then they are able to say no and 
be very cautious out of that experience because it was painful. It does not mean that it was harmful to 
them or bad. It is simply that they will always remember what did not work and they will not get involved 
with that again because they are by their very nature cautious, regardless of how social they are. 

12.6 Metamorphosis 

Here we have a very extraordinary sixth line. The next great mutation that will take place in humanity 
will take place in this stream that runs all the way down to the 39. The mutation will actually take place in 
the 55.6 and will eventually find its manifestation in the expression through the 12.6. This will be the 
mutation that opens up what the Voice referred to as our Spirit Consciousness. That is the consciousness 
that is possible underneath the emotional motor. This line is called Metamorphosis. Faith in, and energy 
applied towards change and emergence from standstill. 

Sun exalted. Creative transcendence that, when connected to the harmonic gate 22 through the channel of 
Openness, leads to successful mutation and the emergence of a new social form; or A retrograde 
metamorphosis that has evolved a perfected adaptation to standstill. This is typical of the sixth line. Here 
you have the potential for real mutation, the mutation of the social form itself. This mutation has not come 

yet. We have minor mutations of the social form, but the real major mutation has not come yet. This sixth 
line is always waiting for this mutation. 

Not only are they less likely to be social, they are less likely to be cautious. They don't care about either 
of those things. What they really care about is what is the mutation and what will it do? The next gate is 
the 15, which is the love of humanity and it is on the path to leadership. What can it do for humanity? Is 
this social mutation going to be of value to the totality? This is so important to all sixth lines. They have 
to see that something can really be It'. 

The capacity to mutate and express new social forms. This is always inherent in the 12.6. It means that if 
you have that kind of energy, it is always possible for you, through your explanation, to bring a real 
change in the way in which people deal with each other. In bringing out this mutative energy, this is what 
slowly begins to change everything. Without mutation, there is no real change. 

When you come to the other side: The perfected adaptation to caution that can accept social limitations. 
These are people that will just stand back forever and say, "That is the way it is and nothing is going to 
change that. Why should I get involved? Why should I go through all the pain of dealing with their 
emotional wave to try to get them to a point where they can really be clear about what I am explaining to 
them? It is just not worth it because they are too confused and we will never get this thing to work out." 

Whereas the exalted of the 12.6 recognizes deep inside that it has a genetic capacity to change the 
emotional system, this line will truly be a metamorphic line in the moment that the solar plex center starts 
its actual mutative change. All of that will be expressed through this stream. But, like all sixth lines, you 
have to recognize that the nature of that is to be an example for others. The deepest thing that lies within 
the individual is, "Whatever I am presenting as an explanation, it has to be a valid example for others or 
they are going to stone me, or they will see me as a hypocrite if they can't understand it. Then they will 
think that I am not telling them something that is valid or true." The 12.6 is deeply cautious but at the 
same time, there is magic in it because it can bring deep mutation to humanity. 

HEXAGRAM 13 THE FELLOWSHIP OF MAN 

We come to the collective process, to one of the role gates. It is different from the individual process, 
which is about the individual direction, about being the direction. The perspective that we have in the role 
of individuality is the perspective of being able to release the role in the now, of just being able to get the 
creative process out. 

When you come into the collective roles, you come to something different. The logical collective role will 
project into the future and the abstract collective role will always looks backwards into the past. It is here 
that the collective gets to establish where it has been and where it is going which gives it its sense of 
continuity and its sense of well-being. After all, everything about how we stabilize our existence is, in 
essence, about the collective field. 

We come to the 13th hexagram, The Fellowship of Man, which is of extreme importance to the nature of 
what it is to be human. That is, the abstract circuitry represents our experiential way which is literally the 
way of being human. This way begins with the 41st hexagram, the initiating codon, the beginning of 
experience, and gets completed in this channel 33/13 of the witness and The Prodigal. It is something to 
understand about the nature of any abstract process: nothing is really learned until the process is really 
over. 

It is one of the keys to being in the abstract (you will see that particularly in the Vessel of Love, in the 
46): to be in the experience because, unless one is totally absorbed within the experience, one does not 
accrue enough information for a proper reflection later. If you are not always looking in the rear view 
mirror, you are bound to miss certain things that you have passed. 

The 13 l gate is the gate of the listener, but more important than that, it is a gate of secrets because it 
collects the reflections of the past. This is one of the many gates within the rave system that is specifically 
associated with memory. Above the lines in the hexagram it says: Universal ideas and values in an 
ordered framework which inspires humanistic cooperation. 

'Universal ideas and values in an ordered framework..." This is the whole process of collecting the past. 
The time is the continuity or, in the case of the passenger driving in the car, the distance is the continuity. 
We do that with calendars. We have a big date coming up: 2000. It gives us this sense of continuity and 
we can all look back 1000 years and can say, "Well, we have completed this continuity." 

...which inspires humanistic cooperation. That is, it is this continuity and the collection of history that 
inspires humanity. It is true. It inspires humanity in the sense that, unlike our mammalian cousins, we 
don't have to start over every generation. Human beings have this capacity to be able to store memory and 
then to be able to exchange it, to share it within in the nature of the collective process. 

This sharing of history is indeed inspiring to humanity. It is a much faster process today, for example, 
than it was 100 years ago. Our collection system is faster, our dispersion system is faster and the faster we 
get, the more advanced each generation is from the one before it because it gets to learn essential 
information that has been learned by the previous generation. And it gets to learn it right away when it 
comes into the world. This is the advantage of the 13th gate: to store our experience in order to inspire 
humanity with it. 

13.1 Empathy 

"The ability to relate and commune with everyone with equanimity" is something that you learn in the 
lifetime and not something that you learn right away. All first lines give you a key. The key in this 

hexagram is about the empathic process. The line is called Empathy and it is an overview line, which 
means that The lower trigram does not know that there is anyone to listen to and everything they hear is 
sort of by accident. In other words, they really get secrets in a way. They hear things that they did not 
even realize they were supposed to hear or could hear and suddenly they have access to it. 

Venus exalted. "Harmony through affection. A role of openness in listening to others with affection. " 
The 13th gate is the role of the self in its openness for interaction with others, in its ability to be receptive 
to others and because this is a gate that collects history, it collects people's stories. It is by its very nature 
an empathic gate. It is always pulling people to it in that sense. 

In the white book, we have this Venusian Role of openness in listening to others with affection. This is 
one of the foundations of getting secrets out of people. For example, in crime movies where you have the 
good cops and the bad ones. The good one is so sweet that he always gets the story. This is empathic 
listening with affection. 

The Moon in detriment. The politician kissing babies. An openness that is never free of motives. " This is 
superficial affection, but at the same time, the politician that is ready to go out and to kiss the babies is 
empathic enough to hear the stories of the parents. 

In the white book: An openness that is never free of motives. It is very important to see that motive is 
going to be a part of the 13th gate process because the 13 is burdened by other people. The lower trigram 
always feels the burden the greatest. They say, "Why do people bother me? I have to listen to them." 
There is a genuine affection built into this gate where it does tend to listen for the sake of soothing the 
other rather than for what it thinks it is going to hear or for the value of what it is going to hear is. It is just 
collecting in that sense. 

13.2 Bigotry 

One of the things you must have noticed in your work with Human Design is that second lines have funny 
names and they are often deeply misunderstood, like the 58.2, Perversion, the 46.2, Prima donna, the 
18.2, Terminal disease, or Degeneracy in the 48.2. Second lines have strong names and people are always 
very concerned about them, mostly because they simply cannot understand how the line actually works. 

Realize what a second line is: that other people are seeing you as that aspect; they are looking inside of 
you and see you. Think about what happens to the 13.2. Everybody who steps into the aura of a 13.2 
assumes that they are going to listen to them empathetically. They just assume it. The 13.2 is minding its 
own business, not listening and not needing to hear anything in particular. All of a sudden, there is 
somebody stepping into its aura and telling it things and the 13.2 is quite surprised. What happens to the 
13.2 (think about lines as children) is that they end up listening to all kinds of different voices they have 
no control over and they end up being quite frankly disgusted by it. They hear that people have a lot of 
crap to say. 

Remember that the 13 is really here to distinguish the values and ideals that we have experienced in order 
to inspire humanity. Here is the 13.2 being forced to listen to all kinds of different people. Do not 
misunderstand that line of Bigotry. A 13.2 gets all these people in their life telling them things that they 
did not ask for in the first place. Yes, they end up being quite discriminatory. The risk, always present, 
that fellowship can only exist for a particular type, whether racial, religious, national or intellectual. 

Moon exalted. Tolerance as the least offensive manifestation of bigotry. In the white book: A role of 
openness through tolerance. This is not a dirty word. The fact of the matter is that the 13.2 that has the 
exalted still has to suffer many fools in their lives and they wonder, "Why am I listening to all this stuff?" 

In the detriment: The obsessive belief that the highest ideals cannot be embraced by the lowest forms. An 
extremely difficult position, where even the highest ideals provide rationalization for hatred. It is not 
difficult, given the experience of what it is to be human, to find things to dislike about human beings. We 
know that. We find things to dislike about the people that we love the most. After all, we are very good at 
finding things that we dislike about other human beings. It is quite a common thing. 

The detriment in the white book: A role of openness so narrow that there is practically no one worth 
listening to. They may in fact go deaf and will not listen to any of it because "They are all fools and they 
are just bothering me." That does not preclude that they will get to hear what they have to. Remember, 
this is deeply social. We are talking about the collective gate which is by its very nature social. This 
collection of history is a social phenomenon that we used to have as oral history when the shaman of the 
tribe tells the story of their fathers and grandfathers. Thus, a tradition of knowledge is built based on the 
communication of experience. 13.2's can end up being quite bitter about the nature of what humanity 
really is. Don't blame them for being the bigots. 

There is a risk that is referred to in the introduction line that refers to there being a risk for humanity if 
this would dominate in the world. It is part of what we have in the world a lot of prejudice. Prejudice can 
be positive or negative. You can have a 13.2 that has a relatively clean psyche and their prejudice is 
something that they learn to deal with because they learn to see that human beings just don't have always 
something worthwhile to contribute. On the other hand, you have all kinds of people that will take the 

13.2 and turn that into a reason to dislike the other. So it is a risk for humanity. 

There is this moment for a 13.2 where, all of sudden, people that you never expected to have something 
important to say, do so. Usually children do that to them. That awakens the possibility that you can 
actually hear something worthwhile from the unexpected. Kids can say something very profound and it 
just changes the 13.2. 

By the way, the answer for all second lines is rooted in the individual process in the 10.2, where it says, 
'Be a hermit,' and in the 12.2, where it says, 'Purify yourself from all negative forces.' You have to be very 
careful with any second line that you let into your aura because they can penetrate you so easily and see 
that aspect in your nature. 

13.3 Pessimism 

The third line, because it is an adaptive line and because it is trial and error, you will have trial and error 
in who you listen to. It is not the uncontrolled process that happens to the second line. This is a process of 
tuning in through trial and error who you listen to, who you take in to hear. You can see that in the line 
called Pessimism, which is an overview line, that it is a lifelong process. 

The belief that what is best can never be achieved. This is something that the third line learns as a curve in 
life. This is its learning process. What happens to it is that the moment that it is listening to a certain type, 
it gets what it does not want to hear. It gets to see in that human being what it does not want. It tries to 
listen to another type. It goes through quite a process of disappointment in life about the nature of what a 
human being is. 

The Earth exalted. A lack of trust that can only be transformed through concrete evidence. This is a 
possibility for mutation in the abstract process: to make sense out of the past. It helps to have evidence 
rather than just speculation. 13.3's become very suspicious of people. They become deeply mistrusting of 
them and they are the kind of people that know a kind of storyline being delivered to them. They are very 
good at hearing the propaganda, the lie. 

In the white book: Openness that is conditioned by suspicion and seeks evidence. In America, they have 
this wonderful expression: 'the Man from Missouri' who says, "Show me." It is always this hand out. 
"Show me. Put it here in my hand. Let me see exactly what it is." 

Venus in detriment. Pessimism exalted to an art form... The one thing about realizing that human beings 
don't live up to the ideal is that they are also humorous in the way that they do not live up to the ideal. 
One can call that black humor but it can become art. It can become satire. In other words, rather than 
trying to inspire humanity with history and facts, which can be quite brutal (who can read the historic 
record of the last century and not be astounded at how barbaric human beings can be?), this is satire. The 
satire can have the same effect. It can inspire humanity. 

My favorite 13.3 story is about the famous Irish writer, Jonathan Swift, a member of the English 
parliament, who was born the beginning of the 18th century. He is the author of 'Gulliver's Travels'. 
During that time, the English and the Irish had trouble with each other so he wrote a satire: 'Modest 
Proposal'. What he proposed, in order to make everybody happy, was that the Irish should sell their babies 
to the English for food. He talked about how wonderful that would be. There would not be so many Irish 
babies, so this would not be a problem. People would have enough to eat and babies are really delicious 
and he gave recipes for cooking them. He described how the English would love to eat these fresh babies 
and there would not be these supply problems. It was satire. It was meant to humiliate the English. The 
fact is that the satire was actually taken seriously by some people, which is really quite astonishing. The 
impact of pessimism as art is that it humiliates us to the point that we laugh at ourselves and, perhaps, that 
has some impact on our direction. 

Because the 13th gate is a gate of secrets, every time the lower trigram gets access to the throat, what 
pops out is something that the 13th gate is unprepared for because it is not consciously holding onto what 
it is listening to in that gate. The 13th is a gate where memory is stored. How that memory pops out is 
dependent on the 33 that steps into its aura, or on whatever way it gets that information out. Often that 
satire can be cruel and bitter and, sometimes, 13.3s can say things to people that are just devastating, 
which is actually their form of satire but can be taken as something that is bitterly cruel. 

13.4 Fatigue 

With the fourth line we come to the recognition that there is an opportunity as a possibility for expression 
out of the throat. Because of that, the fourth and fifth lines, in particular, have a different process that they 
have to deal with. Third lines are inherently weak. It is a weakness simply in the sense that third lines 
always have to adapt, always have to go through trial and error and mistakes. In that sense, it is an 
inherent weakness. But when you come to the abstract process, you will find that the real weakness in this 
process is in the fourth line and not in the third. You can smell the weakness of the abstract process in the 
30.4, Burnout. Here, we have a very similar fourth line to the 30.4. This line is called Fatigue. 

Think about what happens: the 13th gate is there to listen. The lower trigram only listens when it is 
broken in on because it does not look for it. It does not know that the possibility is out there that someone 
will tell it something. But the fourth line knows that and it goes out there to listen. It is ready to listen and 
because of that, it does not get to do the most important thing, which is that after listening comes the 
reflection. It just keeps on listening. This is somebody who decides that they will write a great book about 
the experiences of people in Sarajevo during the civil war. What they end up doing is recording people 
endlessly. They never write their book. They are totally burned out by the process of just going through 
listening. Fatigue. 

Overview line: The point of exhaustion eventually reached when one is too tired to fight. This will have a 
deep significance, depending on the nature of the design and type. If you have an energy type, they will 

listen longer than those who are not. The energy and the non-energy type, though both will still reach the 
same point of exhaustion, they will reach it at different times in their lives. 

Pluto exalted. This is the only line in the 13 that is Pluto-related and this is a generation that was born in 
the 1940's or 1950's. The renaissance that comes with truce and its eventual reinvigoration. In other 
words, this is the moment where you stop the listening. They finally learn to stop listening. They have 
heard enough. They do not need to hear anymore. 

Openness which leads to exhaustion and the need for silence. You can interpret the silence as a need for 
reflection afterwards. There must be this space; otherwise, it does not work. 

On the other side of this fourth line, we have Venus in detriment. Emotional exhaustion. Appeasement 
and withdrawal. Regarding the emotional context that is given here, the abstract process is deeply related 
to the solar plex system. Our human experience is conditioned by the solar plex. The desire in life, the 
desire to be alive, the desire for life, is all rooted in the emotional system. Those people who are 13's end 
up taking in an enormous amount of emotional energy in their life. Somebody goes down in their 
emotional wave, seeks out the 13 to unburden themselves and the 13 ends up taking it all in. You find that 
13's with undefined emotional systems end up being very sick, whereas 13's with a defined emotional 
system can survive it because they generate their own wave. 

The detriment in the white book: A role where openness is a vulnerability. Think about the irony here. 
Fourth lines are normally very influential because they are one-tracked and focused and because they do 
have the gift of externalizing. But here, it is detriment. Here, the fact that one can externalize the listening 
also means that, in their fixedness, they don't know how to stop listening. Only when they get to the point 
of exhaustion do they stop. These are people that end up working as social therapists of some kind and 
they build their schedule so that they have people talk to them all day long, every day. After three or four 
months they collapse; they get very sick, take three weeks off to recuperate because they are very ill, and 
then they go back into exactly the same program because they do not know how to stop listening unless 
they are exhausted. 

One of my favorite stories about the 13's in my life. I have the 33.6. I originally had a publisher who 
wanted to bring out the Human Design system in English and German. He told me he knew a very good 
translator and that he would get in touch with him. I was living in Bavaria at that time and the publisher 
told me that the translator was nearby. The first time I was given Jiirgen's name, I asked for his data 
because I wanted to see his chart. Jiirgen has the 13.2 and the 13.5. 1 said: "A bigot savior. That is perfect 
for Human Design. " 

13.5 The Savior 

Everybody projects on the 13.5 that they will listen. That is not necessarily true. They may not be willing 
to listen to others. However, this is a projected field and the fact is that we, society as a whole, consider 
listeners to be our saviors. That is very important to understand. What that reveals is just an intrinsic 
quality of what it is to be human. We are here to share with each other the nature of what it is to be in the 
world. That is why here in this fifth line, in this gate, we have such a name. We give great spiritual value 
to such a name. It is our salvation that we have the gift of being able to share with each other and in that 
way, to be able to inspire new generations with what we have been able to achieve in our experience. As 
an advantage, we make it a lot easier for them. So, 13.5's can be honored in this life. They can also be 
deeply burdened. 

The Savior. The ability to overcome all obstacles for the betterment of humanity. The fact is that 13.5's 
get information from people who would otherwise never tell you anything. Nothing. The 13.5's get those 

secrets. They get them because, even for those people who are so deeply silent, they recognize that this 
could be their savior. They do not really think that. It is just an opportunity for them to unburden 
themselves. Human beings need to unburden themselves. One of the reasons why we have partners in this 
life is so that we have somebody we can say to, "I had a terrible day today," and you can commiserate 
together over how terrible your day has been. We really need that. It is part of being human. 

Neptune exalted. Always be suspicious when you see Neptune exalted. What that is saying to you is: you 
don't really know what is going on, which means that that can already be a dilemma. The other thing it is 
saying is that if you don't bother with it, you have a spiritual opportunity. The charismatic genius who can 
find a role for everyone. 

In the white book: The listener that has a gift for finding a role for others. Remember that this is the 
perspective of the driver looking backwards. We have gone this way, that way and the other way and, by 
the 13.5 listening, they can see how that person fits into those various roles. "This is your way. I know all 
about this way. Let me tell you about this way." 

Jupiter in detriment (not very detrimental). The able administrator. Given the extreme positive nature of 
this position, mundane application is rare. 'Extreme' is a word that is not used very often. 
In the white book: The listener whose gift for finding a role for others is practical and suited to 
administration. Go back to what it is to be a 13.5 child. It is very different. The 13.5 baby who comes into 
the world is not a savior and yet, this baby gets to hear his mother's laments. The mother does not really 
realize that the baby is taking that in or pulling it out. They hear things growing up that they do not 
necessarily want to hear. They find out things that they do not necessarily want to find out and they get to 
experience things they do not necessarily want to experience. 

Out of that process comes the projection of being a listener. But, of course, there is also a great advantage 
because people are willing to tell them things. They have the advantage of knowing a great deal because 
of that. Thus, they can be of value to humanity in being able to share that experience. Whether or not that 
gets out is another story. Again, remember that this is a gate that has great transpersonal skills but it still 
has to find the 33 at the other side in order to express itself properly. 

13.6 The Optimist 

When you look at the 13.6, think about the 59.6. Think about it in the sense that this is the course of 
promiscuous listening that takes place when one is young and quickly ends because one ends up looking 
for the soul mate to listen to, that perfect person or thing to listen to. Sitting up there on the roof of the 
house, there is the dream that there is really an experience, that there is really something that is worth 
listening to and worth reflecting upon for the benefit of humanity. 

The Optimist. The ability to accept any limited interaction... (This is in the early part of life.) ... as a 
necessary step towards greater union. Remember that this is the harmony to the third line of Pessimism 
where one is constantly disappointed by what one meets in the world, that human beings are mundane, 
that what they talk about is not very interesting. It is just the same old human stuff and it is very easy to 
become pessimistic in the third line. But the sixth line knows better, in the sense that it is transpersonal. It 
looks to the whole circuitry, to the whole experiential way, and it knows that in that experience, there are 
things of value that always come out. So there is hope. 

Mars exalted. The energy to persevere. Unlimited hope. In the white book: The hope that openness will 
lead to better relationships. Again, please understand that the whole thing about the listener is that it is not 
what the listener is hearing; it is through whom the listener hears because this is so deeply social. This is 
about collecting history from others so that, in the end, the optimism is about the quality of the experience 

in the people that you meet. The old Chinese saying, "May you live in interesting times." At least you 
have something interesting to say. 

Mercury in detriment. Navvete. By the way, that naivete is often a presumption of others. That is, the 
hope is not naive. The abstract process is connected to the emotional wave and recognizes that hope is 
part of the world. It knows that there are things that can be hoped for because in the cycle of things they 
can be fulfilled. 

The translation of mutual interest into universality. This detriment is not so bad. It is really about trying to 
find a way in which, through relationships, the experience of humanity is something that is uplifting. So, 
the moment that the 13.6 finds some commonality with somebody, there is this sense that "Maybe 
everybody could be like this," or "Maybe everybody could do this." 

The 13.6 does not have an easy place to go to. It goes to the 49.1. It goes to the place of emotional 
principles. It goes to the place that will establish what we really need. "What is necessary?" is the theme 
of the 49.1. So the 13.6 sits up there as an Optimist and hopes but at the same time, it realizes: "Do I 
know what is really necessary?" What it is looking for is a hope for what is necessary because what is 
necessary will ultimately make the difference in experience. 

Don't expect 13.6's, once they are mature, to really listen. They often just don't. Like all sixth lines, they 
have that possibility for truly wise experiences. This naivete is only when they are young but it is also a 
presumption of others. That is, when you speak to an adult who is an optimist and they are full of hope, 
you tend to look at them as if they were a kind of bumpkin. The world is a tough place; we all know that. 
Most hopes in life that are really big hopes get dashed in the way life works. So, when you have a mature 
person telling you, "I know that a better world will come; Jesus is coming," we think that they are naive, 
but actually they are not. It is just the way they appear to be. It is not naive. It is part of what it is to be 
human, which is to suffer and to be hopeful at the other side. This is life. What to do? 

HEXAGRAM 14 POSSESSION IN GREAT MEASURE 

Gate 14 is Possession in Great Measure. It does not give away its power. One of the themes that underlie 
this hexagram in the traditional ['Ching is this concept of wealth and the loading up of the wagon. Our 
most common word for energy is money. 

The power that is inherent here in the 14th gate is not about money in the sense of hard currency. It is 
about power as currency. Whenever people have defined motors and they are dependent on other people 
to get that energy out, I always tell them, "You wouldn't walk through the street with a basket full of 
money and let everybody grab in there and pull out the money." That energy itself is a force to bring 
about the right direction. 

14.1 Money isn't everything 

First lines always describe the nature of a hexagram. It says Money isn't everything. It is very important 
to understand the nature of this gate. This is an individual power source that is focused on bringing about 
order through empowering the right direction. 

The recognition that wealth has its own problems. Jupiter exalted. The lust for lucre tempered by higher 
principals. Mercury in detriment. The delusion that you can throw money at problems. The basis of this 
hexagram on the exalted side is the desperation to turn the energy into currency. You want that energy to 
be converted into a successful direction. After all, it is a main tantric channel. In the detriment, there is 
this sense that you give your energy to others so that they will get you to the right direction. I know so 
many 14's who look at my 2 and say, "I have the key and you'll be the driver." 

In the white book: The key to manifesting power is higher principles. The higher principle is, "I am not 
wasting my energy. I use my energy for the correct direction in my process in order to bring about order." 

The other side of this is: Energy alone can never be the key. You can't just pay someone to take you to the 
right direction. It does not work. You can't just throw your energy at them. Think about the dilemma of 
the third gate, which is the inherent confusion in the life process. That confusion has not disappeared by 
the time you get to the 14th gate. 

We are still talking about an unaware center. The 14th gate has all the power within it to drive, but it does 
not know where to drive. On its own, it can't know where to drive, so there is always a tendency in people 
with the 14th gate to make attempts at doing things that are not for them, or they will ask other people to 
take them into that direction. 

There is a helplessness in this Possession in Great Measure. It is important to understand that it is an 
enormously powerful gate but it is truly vulnerable to being misguided. Remember that the first line is 
there to understand the nature of the hexagram: it does have this power for direction, but that does not 
mean that it knows what to do with it. It does not know where it is going in its process. 

14.2 Management 

When you get to the second line, you get to projection. Instead of being involved in recognizing the 
nature of one's own power to empower, here is someone who is projecting out that they have that power. 

This line is called Management. It is a joke. The wisdom that investing in expertise brings rewards. First 
of all, wisdom is something that you do not get right away in life. You may never get it at all. This is an 
advice to the second line. It says expertise would really help you to find the right direction. When you are 

dealing with the first three lines, the lower trigram, there is no capacity to understand the nature of the 
other side. The 14.1, 2 and 3 know at some level that there is this power within them, but they do not 
know the driver. They always have to meet the driver. They just project out this energy. 

Jupiter exalted. Expansion. The ability to delegate responsibility. Mars in detriment. The vanity to be 
one's own best expert. This is individual. Built into their genetic individual material (that means every 
single genetic gate) is a selfpreservation phenomenon that says, "Don't interfere with me. Don't take me 
away from my trip. Don't try to control me. Don't try to condition me." All individuality is that way. 

When you get to the second line, the exalted says: The key to power lies in not trying to be and do 
everything alone. Remember, that they are projecting out that they have this power. So that is what they 
assume they can do. "I have the power and I can get my own direction. Nobody needs to help me." 

On the other side: The key to power is doing everything individually. It is Mars. You know, I try very 
hard to get you to let go of your moralistic judgments about this and that. Mars, in its immaturity, gets a 
very bad reputation. In this particular line, that immaturity is actually of value because the immaturity 
says, "I do not need anybody else. I do have the power. I can do it myself. I know where I will go." It 
does not mean that they do. It still means that they will run into all the problems that second lines run 
into, which is being found out: big talk about your direction but you do not get there. 

By the way, if someone comes to me for a reading and they have the detriment in that line, I tell them, 
"Be your own expert, no matter what happens." That is their nature. None of this is about seeing any of 
those aspects as being less, or missing, or wrong. It is exactly what the genetic information within them 
demands, in that sense. 

14.3 Service 

When you get to the third line, you get to Service. By the way, people who have the 14th gate always 
have a great deal of power within them and they are often very successful materially in their process 
because that power does convert. When they find the right direction they can always turn that energy into 
currency. They can always turn that energy into what looks after them. 

When you come to the third line, you come to the process of trial and error in life. The whole thing for the 
14 is to recognize that the only way for them to get through the whole process, ultimately, is to find some 
way to externalize that energy as service. 

The utilization of talent and wealth for the highest good. This channel leads to the 8/1 which is the 
Creative Role Model. Individuality is never about being best. It is about being different. The wealth and 
talent of any individual lies in the glorification of their own individuality and their identification with 
their individuality, so that they can be different. 

Earth exalted. Selfless contribution to society. That sounds very nice. It does not mean that it is going to 
work. It does not mean that they will be rewarded, because they will make mistakes. "I will give my 
energy to the anarchist movement." That service to any kind of higher principle (by the way, those are 
relative terms) is going to be filled with trial and error and these people will offer their energy to different 
drivers until they have the experience to recognize which driver can really be good for them. 

Neptune in detriment. Greed and the self-destruction of moral fiber. This line is deeply misunderstood. 
The greed of this line is what you see at the very top, 'The accumulation and retention of power'. If you 
are holding all this power inside of you and you do not find a way to release it, it will make you ill. It is 
the greed of saying, "I am not going to provide you with that energy." It is like driving up to a gas station 

with your car and the car is empty. You push it in and the gas station attendant looks at you and says, 
"No. I want to keep this gasoline because my car can run out of gasoline. You'd better push your car some 
place else." 

The 'moral fiber' is in the sense of how society will react to that kind of holding back of all of that energy: 
by condemning it. If somebody has this line, it does not mean that it is a negative. It means that is the way 
in which they are going to come to grips with this process of trial and error. 

Remember, everything about the 14th hexagram is dependent on wisdom, which comes later. So, what 
these people end up being very good at, late in life, is being the ones who know that there will always be 
the possibility for a perfect place to put their energy. It is deep inside. It does not get to manifest until the 
resonance in the sixth line. In reality, there is this touch of it underneath where they say, "Aha, I am 
actually holding on to all of this money so that I can give it away to a really good cause, but I have not 
found the cause yet. If I do find it, I will give it all away." Bill Gates said: "I am too young to give away 
my money, and I do not know what to give it to. " Holding on with the potential that it can be of service. 

14.4 Security 

The 14th gate may not be aware. The nature of the fuel conditions the direction. Think about it as the 
difference between a vegetarian and a carnivore. A vegetarian 14 or a carnivore 14 will push you in 
different directions because you have to shop in different places to fulfill that energy. It may not be aware, 
but it will change the direction just out of the very nature of the energy. When you come to the fourth 
line, you come to the first possibility to be able to go across the channel to recognize that one has to deal 
with the other side: that there is a driver. 

The first thing that this is all about is the skill of being able to fix your power and show it on the outside. 
The fourth line is always about being one-directional, being focused, being fixed. It is taking an aspect out 
of the foundation of its nature and it is fixing it. The concentration on establishing a strong foundation. 

Moon exalted. Protection from assault. These are people that project out their power in a very fixed way. 
It is very difficult to take these people away from that. This is their thing. 

Mars in detriment. Overconfidence in meeting the challenge of competition that may threaten the very 
basis of security. 

They are so fixed in their power, one way. For example, somebody that always wants to hit you in the 
face, if you know that they are fixed that way, you can kick them between the legs. They are not ready for 
that. They can have a lot of power focused in one direction but they can be enormously weak all over the 
place. It is very important to understand that about the limitation of Security. 

The key to power lies in developing skills to ensure a strong foundation. The skills lie in the focusing of 
that energy. These people need to have a very fixed direction in life. It is very important for them to see 
that their energy is being put in one thing and it is moving along and they move through that path, and 
then they can develop the skill for using that energy. 

On the other side: Without the proper skills, the inability to guarantee security. If one does not really 
know how to deal with that energy, if they cannot find a way of fixing that energy, they can be easily 
manipulated by other people. Their energy gets easily pulled away. Remember that the fourth line is the 
beginning of this transpersonal process. Because of that, it runs into difficulties due to its fixedness. It still 
does not have the capacity to be embraced by the other side. That comes with the fifth line. When I do a 

reading for somebody who has this line, I always tell them the same thing, "Get a job that you really love, 
and do it and fix your energy on it. " 

14.5 Arrogance 

The first line is about the nature of the hexagram and the fifth line is how the world wants it to be. The 
fifth line is in resonance to the second line. We saw that the second line projects out that power but it does 
not necessarily have it. By the way, the 2.2 on the other side, in the detriment, can be genius as madness. 
The inability to recognize one's own nature projecting outwards can lead to very bizarre and dangerous 
paths. 

In the fifth line you come to a field that is being projected upon. That is why the line is called Arrogance. 
The ever present risk inherent in positions of power. It does not mean that you are in a position of power. 
It means that everybody assumes that you are in a position of power. When you meet a 14.5, you assume 
that they are powerful. This is how you project onto their energy. They may or may not be powerful. 

Sun exalted. Innate dignity. The only protection for an individual who is projected upon as being 
powerful is that they'd better mind their p's and q's, or other people will gang up on them and check out 
that power to find out how long it takes to nail them to the cross. 

Venus in detriment. A dissatisfaction with the gifts of others that creates feelings of superiority. You get 
projected on that you have the power to provide the energy for direction, but people will provide the link. 
This is a transpersonal process, the 14 with the 2, and the 2 becomes the driver. The 14 is sitting there 
saying. "I am giving this one all this fuel and this is where they take me? I don't think that they are good 
drivers. I don't think they know where they are going." Out of that comes the sense of, "They are not very 
important. They are not very good at what they are doing. They are limited in their capacity." This is the 
other side. The fifth is always being projected on. The world sees power as arrogance. 

14.6 Humility 

When you get to the sixth line you get to the end of a process, so you go beyond the nature of the 
hexagram itself. We saw that, whenever we were looking at the sixth line of any gate, it is pointed 
towards the first line of the next gate, which is the 34.1, in this case. They are deeply related to each other. 
There is such a mystery in following the movement of the wheel to understand what is really going on 
inside of us. The 34 is about keeping us alive. 

Here, in the sixth line, you have Humility. That is where you go from the projection of Arrogance. The 
14.5 that is clear about the nature of its energy and that has a lousy driver, has every right in the world to 
think that this driver doesn't know where they are going. That is not arrogance. That is the 14.5 refusing 
to be the victim of the 3.5, the theme of which was Victimization. The 14.5 says, "I am not going to be 
your victim. If you want all my power, you are seducing me, so you'd better take me to the right place." 
When you get to the sixth line, all that stuff is over. Here, you have the humility that recognizes very 
clearly that it has power. Right after that it says, "So what?" The fulfillment of that power can never be 
that person's own. 

Remember the nature of the knowing circuit. In order for it to be fulfilled, it is not possible for one human 
being to carry within them that activation. It is not possible. Our knowing process and our awareness 
processes are deeply connected to our interrelationship with each other. 

The recognition takes two sides: the spiritual side is, "It is in the hands of the gods. It is god's will. This 
energy was given to me." The other side literally is the same. It is just stripped of its mystical, faith 

oriented aspect. It is just the same: "I am lucky." It is the existential good luck of being in the right place 
at the right time. 

Humility. Wealth and power at its most exalted. Sun exalted. The enlightened recognition that material 
success is God's will. Earth in detriment. All manifestations of this position are essentially positive. The 
Earth represents the existentialist recognition that material success was unavoidable... (You could not 
avoid being given this power. You got it with birth.) ...and the humility engendered by such serendipity. 

Just because they recognize that they have been given all that power, there is nothing that says that they 
will do anything with it. It does not mean that they will find a driver. Think about the 59.6, the One Night 
Stand. The 14.6 is saying, "Yes, I will accept a driver but it better be a very special one because I just do 
not want to go around the block. I want to see the whole thing. I will accept you as a driver if, in the end, I 
can be clear about what it is that I know through my connection to you." 

After all, this is all about knowing. Be clear about sixth lines. This sixth line has enormous power in it, 
but they rarely commit their energy to anything. It is not just about going across the channel and finding 
the driver. It is about where the driver will take them. It is not about having the opportunity to fill the car 
up with fuel and drive off because the driver can turn the key and move along the road. It is: "Where are 
we going on this road?" 

Where every individual goes is silence. This is path of all individuality: to the silence of coming to the 
point where what is knowable is known. The 14.6 wants to know that the direction it takes through that 
relationship goes where it needs to go, in order for it to know its own nature and the value of its 
movement through space. But all sixth lines stand back and say, "Yes, but I'll wait. This is God's will." 
This is the existential reality. This is not about being selective. This is not about looking for drivers. This 
is about it happening and the good fortune that one can see in that, finally, there is this possibility. 

HEXAGRAM 15 MODESTY 

(Please read the section on the Vessel of Love from the Glossary in Volume 2 copied below.) 

ANALOGY FOR THE VESSEL OF LOVE 

The Vessel of Love is one of the incarnation crosses comprised of four gates: the 15 (Modesty), the 46 
(Pushing Upward), the 25 (Innocence), and the 10 (Treading). 

The Vessel of Love is not something that is understood. We have a great deal of confusion about the 
nature of love. There are many ways in which love exists in the world. Most human beings are familiar 
with love through what we call electro-magnetic connection: that love is a question of attraction and 
repulsion. The real nature of love is something that tends to be locked up with that attraction and 
repulsion that we have in those kinds of interactions. 

The ego and the Self ( the G center) are very different and the love of the ego, which is a possessive love, 
is very different than the love of the Self. The love of the Self is never something that is directly personal. 
It has a great deal to do with oneself, but the real love is something that is a by-product of the way human 
beings live their lives. That is what real love means. So in looking at these four different gates, not only 
will I try to bring you to a point that you see the nature of the lines, but also to keep in mind the nature of 
these gates of love and how they operate in the world. 

In order to really understand the Vessel of Love, it is best to have an analogy and I use the analogy of a 
container for all four gates of the Vessel. You can call it a vessel. The container has an outside wall. Our 
outside wall is what we call the aura. That is, you are penetrated the moment that somebody penetrates 
your aura. The outside wall, the aura, is the 15th gate, the love of humanity, which is in essence the 
collective aura that adds up to the totality, but it is the surface of us. If you have a vessel and go inside the 
vessel, you have a wall on the outside, what we call the aura, but you also have a wall on the inside that 
contains it. For us, it is no longer the aura; this becomes the flesh. That is, it becomes this enclosed sack 
that holds us all inside. This is the flesh. This is the container and the 46th gate is the love of the body, the 
love of the flesh. 

If you have a container with an outside and an inside wall and it is contained, you have to have something 
inside. What you have inside, in our case, is blood. What is really inside is what we call universal love, 
the 25th gate. When you have all of that together, the love of humanity that creates the aura, the love of 
the flesh that creates the Maya and the blood that makes it all run with its spirit, you have to have some 
place to go. The way that you go is that you take the Vessel and you pour it and when you pour it, it 
comes out through the lip which is the 10th gate because the 10th gate is the way. The way is the potential 
to love oneself. So, in our work, we will take a look at these four aspects of the Vessel through each of the 
four gates. 

Everything that is alive, every living thing right to the cellular level, all has the 15th gate. It is the only 
universal gate and it is an extraordinary thing. Over the lines, it gives you its nature. The quality of 
behavior does not belong here. It belongs to the polarity of the 15th gate, to the 10th gate. The 10/ 15 
polarity is a very important polarity. It is about behavior because, in the end, the behavior, though it is 
something that can be seen individually, is collective. 

This gate is not speaking of the individual behavior of the 10, but of the collective behavior of humanity. 
The quality of behavior which expresses the proper balance between extremes. Only then do you 
understand what the extremes are about. They are about creating a proper balance for humanity. 
Everything has to be part of the human drama. Everything. And it is here in the 15th gate that we get 

differentiation because we have all of these different possibilities of rhythms that can be created, all of the 
extremes of behavior, in that sense, or the whole field or spectrum of behavior. 

15.1 Duty 

First lines always tell you the truth of a hexagram. Here, the truth is Duty. Overview line: The ability to 
confront any challenge without expectations. Because this is an overview line, this is something that is 
going to be learned. Because we have a lower trigram, it is not personal. Remember that this is the gate of 
the aura. We have the most powerful auras in the fourth and fifth lines and very contained auras in the 
first three lines. In other words, only when they are met by something is there this impression of their 
large aura. 

In fact, that is not an aura that is moving outwards. It is an aura that is being contained because the 
process is an inward one. This ability to confront any challenge, to be able to accept any place within the 
spectrum of extremes, is very important. The love of humanity is not about loving your neighbor, which 
is tough business. It is not about that. It is about being yourself. This generates love in the world. 

Venus exalted. Harmonic relationships which give support for the fulfillment of any task. What we know 
about first lines is that, not only are they not transpersonal, but they are introspective; they are looking 
inwards. You will discover that, in the 15th gate, there are a lot of strange things. You also meet them in 
the 46th gate. They are very odd.This first line is deeply personal but not personal in the sense that it is 
looking outwards for relationships. It is personal in the sense that it is deeply concerned about what 
relationships are all about. How do you make a relationship harmonic? In other words: how do you get 
people not to interfere with your extreme? 

Everything about the lower trigram for people who have the 15th gate is that they can be deeply disturbed 
by people who interfere with their rhythm. Their harmonic relationship is not about how they can have a 
harmonic relationship with others, but how they can find others who have a harmonic relationship with 
them and let them be their extreme so that humanity is balanced. 

When someone is an extremist and you try to stop them (you give them Valium, or you lock them up), you 
thus destroy a piece of love in the world. It sounds funny but it is true. The love of humanity can only 
exist when all of the extremes are permitted, when human beings get to live out their actual nature. 

Mars in detriment. Alienation engendered through exaggerated claims. In white book: The capacity of the 
Self to confront any challenge through extreme and harmonic relationships; or The capacity of the Self to 
alienate others through extremes. All of this is about the social context. The person who is a first line 
extremist does not even know that other people think that he is an extremist until he is told. For them, it 
runs into difficulties because they are always looking for a way to live out their extreme. 

15.2 Influence 

This is an unusual second line because it is an exalted second line for the very reason that most second 
lines are in a vulnerable position: because other people can always see into them. If you are an extremist 
and people can see that you are an extremist, it is likely that they will leave you alone. It is likely that they 
won't interfere with your extremism. This second line has the capacity for being influential. Remember 
that the 15/5 goes right down to the cellular level. It is absolutely essential that we have diversity in 
rhythms. It is absolutely essential that extremists live out their extreme roles. Otherwise, we do not have 
the opportunity to see what genetic rhythm is really of value for the totality. The second line is called 
Influence. There is no overview line. The extremism is right there from the beginning. It does not take 
time. 

The Sun exalted. Modesty and right action result in enduring standards. The ancient Chinese considered 
the 15th hexagram to be perfect. All of the six lines, to the ancient Chinese, are exalted simply because 
this is the core of what it is to be alive in the world. So, that 'enduring standard' is to be oneself. Right 
action is to follow one's extreme. I tell people, if they are busy, run. If you are not busy, sleep. It is okay. 
Honor your extreme. The whole thing with the second line is that it does not know that it is extreme. It is 
just living it out, but other people see the extremism. 

If you have a 15.2 that comes to your office for a steady job, you will not hire them. You may not know 
why you will not hire them. It is not that you say, "This one is unreliable." Something inside of you (they 
have a strong aura) says to you, "Do not hire this person; they will quit next week." 

In the white book: The capacity of the Self to accept its extreme nature as correct. It is very beautiful for 
these people. Where they become the paper tigers is the moment that somebody sees that they are extreme 
and actually tries to change that: some 17 year-old that is dying from junk and everybody wants to save 
that person's life. Quotation of Jesus: "Only my father knows what is clean." Who is to judge the way we 
come or the way we go?" 

The Earth in detriment. Where the Sun's actions are natural, the Earth's are contrived, though given the 
power of this position, the some effect can be expected. The capacity to use the extreme nature of the Self 
to influence others. These are people that finally go get found out. They are extremists; they realize that 
they can use that to their advantage. It is still the same thing. They stay with their extremism. That is 
healthy. Don't break these people of their extreme rhythms. Encourage them to love their rhythms. 

15.3 Ego inflation 

At the end of the lower trigram here, you end up with difficulties. This line is a real trial and error line and 
it really goes through quite a dilemma with that. What often happens to 15.3's is that they do not live out 
their natural extreme rhythm. They find an extreme within themselves that is effective in dealing with 
others and they hang onto that extreme as a way of dealing with others, rather than going through their 
own natural process, which means to be extreme and not. 

Here, in the third line, we have this confusion that comes in the self, where suddenly you see the 
appearance of ego. The confusion is between what is natural and comes to us choicelessly and what the 
ego claims to be its own. This is the attempt to control extreme behavior in order to protect oneself. 
Remember, third lines do not know that there is something else on the other side. They don't know that 
there is a 5 waiting there to lock it into a pattern. So, of course they have to adapt but what they learn is 
that they do not have to adapt to certain types if they keep to a certain kind of extreme behavior. 

The risk that modesty, once recognized, will self-destruct. The Earth exalted and this is a very funny 
exalted. The 15th and 46th gate have very strange lines. Where the otherwise negative contrived 
modesty... In other words: this is extremism that becomes a negative because the person relies on that 
extreme to manipulate others, rather than just going through a natural flow.. ..is here reinforced by 
recognition and maintained as an effective strategy. 

For example: somebody finds that it is very effective for them always to be late, even though it is not 
necessarily natural for them to be late, but it becomes an effective strategy for them to use with other 
people. This is a 15.3 trait, using extremism in a negative way rather than just living out their extreme. 
What that means is that they are being conditioned away from their true extreme rhythm and they are 
being conditioned to work with just one rhythm to protect themselves in their trial and error process. So, 

this is a very strange exalted. Those people who think that exalted lines are all wonderful: have the 15.3 
exalted and see what it is likel 

Mercury in detriment. The 'I told you so' mentality. The moment that you recognize how an extreme 
works, you can predict its effects. Third lines lead to wisdom in the sixth line. This can be very clever. 
This is someone who can really see somebody else's extreme strategy. "I knew they would do that. I told 
you that." 

Ego inflation. The extremism of the Self as a strategy to control the flow. But remember, that is a 
conditioned extreme, not their natural extreme. On the other side: The capacity of the Self to point out the 
extremes of others. Like all things, it does not mean that that is inherently negative. It simply means that 
that is really a process. It is an overview line. It is going to take time. When I was teaching kids, they 
developed extreme techniques in order to get attention. They waited for this extreme technique to work. 
They yelled for instance. It is just that kind of thing. 

15.4 The Wallflower 

When we come to the upper trigram, we are dealing with a gate that represents humanity, that in its nature 
releases or manifests what we call love in terms of humanity, that is in a collective logical circuit which is 
fundamentally social to begin with, and you are dealing with transpersonal gates. 

So, obviously, you are dealing with, particularly in the fourth and fifth lines, a very deep social 
mechanism and yet, at the same time, it is here in this fourth line that you see the underlying dilemma that 
we find in all fourth lines. It is the underlying dilemma that is also in the 18.4, that is the deep inadequacy 
that always accompanies a fourth line. 

Fourth lines are really a perfect binary. On one side, they are enormously influential because that one- 
tracked, fixed focusing is so powerful. Yet, on the other side, by being one -tracked and fixed, there are so 
many other things that are not part of one's process. There are so many other possibilities that are left 
behind. And, unlike the lower trigram that is always ready to meet and to deal with the surprise of the 
other side, the fourth line knows it is there and it feels inadequate. 

This is one of the most deeply inadequate of all lines in the I'Ching. These people feel inadequate because 
all they can ever do is externalize their extreme and they always feel like they are out of place until they 
find an environment, or a relationship, in which they are part of the flow and their extreme fits in. When 
their extreme fits in, they can finally feel okay about the nature of who they are. 

But remember, when you are looking at lines, you have to think about the children that came into the 
world carrying them. 15.4 children can end up with a deep sense of inadequacy in their life because this is 
the collective line that most resembles what it is to be individual. In other words, this is the collective line 
that can feel like a freak. It can feel out of place because it is fixed in its extreme. 

It is called The Wallflower. Modesty as a shield against exposure of inadequacy. Jupiter exalted. A 
genuine form that may or may not mask inadequacies. Saturn in detriment. An ultimately weak defense 
leading to exposure and humiliation. Somebody can be fixed in their extreme and not be inadequate, even 
though, as a person, they can feel inadequate. When they find the flow, that sense of inadequacy will go 
away, but in the detriment, the sense of inadequacy is pushed in their face long before they get a chance to 
really find themselves. Again, please understand that their aura is very powerful and they can find their 
flow. 

In the white book: The uncomfortableness of the Self when it is out of the flow (by being extreme and 
fixed); or Extremism that keeps the Self out of the flow (and the sense of humiliation). Nowhere worse 
than when a child is in school. Remember to look at a line with the perception of it being a child because 
you get a real picture of the adult. This deeply collective child felt out of place, looking for where it could 
find relationships so that it could feel in the flow. 

15.5 Sensitivity 

Fifth lines are what society wants to see a hexagram as being. It is about Sensitivity. Because the fifth line 
gets projected on that it is the extremist and that it is capable of extremes, it is also capable of rising to the 
occasion or not. In other words, the fifth line has a kind of advantage, as many fifth lines do, that it does 
not have to be an extremist but it can certainly be an extremist when it is projected on that it is time to be 
extreme. This is the way society likes it. 

What society likes is the possibility that extremism can be tampered with in some way, based on the 
environment. For example: it is an historical phenomenon that we send young, relatively fresh, innocent 
boys into wars and we tell them to become killing freaks. We turn them into extremes and then we expect 
them to turn that off when they come back because the environment does not require that anymore. All 
these very gentle and noble people who, for centuries, were very polite and distinguished and then they go 
out in the battlefield and go absolutely nuts. Society likes the idea that an extreme is something that can 
be handy when you need it but it can be torn down if the environment does not require it. 

Here the line is called Sensitivity. The ability to sense when otherwise balanced behavior must be 
adjusted to meet the requirements of a changing environment. Jupiter exalted. The power to grow. In 
other words, these people learn to live out their extremes in a way that is not offensive to the totality. 
These people have big auras. If others come and project on them, the aura is reinforced. If you have a 15.3 
and a 15.5, the 15.5 is the one that will get the attention first. It is projected on them. So they learn to deal 
with that. 

Pluto in detriment. The tendency to overcompensate. In other words, to go from one extreme to another 
just to satisfy the needs and demands of the conditioning environment. This can take them out of what is 
natural for them. We have learned something in the 7.5, The General, which was that the fifth line always 
has to wait for the call in order for it to be the one that calls. It has to wait for the right moment in time 
because everything is a matter of time. 

So, the whole thing is that it is not just when the environment changes that the extremism in the 15.5 
balances or alters itself. It is when it is the right time in that changed environment that it has its greatest 
impact because, remember, these people are magnetic people. They bring us into the rhythms. 

Every single one of us here are the by-product of 15 conditioning. All of us. We have all been conditioned 
that way from the very beginning. Every line of the 46 is conditioning. They are all conditioning lines. 
We all get conditioned by all of the people that have the 15 and that represent our spectrum. 

Think about that. If all the people that have the 15th gate don't live out their extreme nature because of the 
conditions of society, you strip away love from the world. You destroy the aura of the world. That is a 
fact. This is what we deal with. The love of humanity is having a society that is ordered enough and 
organized enough that all of the extremes are not extremes anymore, but just a place in the spectrum. 
There has to be a place in the spectrum for all of those things and then we generate a healthy aura as a 
human society. The 15's are deeply conditioned by society. 

By the way, the 15's have their revenge. You condition the 15 not to be extreme but the 15 still controls 
you in its aura. It has its powers. 

In the white book: The capacity of the Self to grow through experiencing the extremes; or The drive of 
the Self to overcompensate and disturb the flow. 

15.6 Self-defense 

We have seen, all along, the quality of the sixth line, which is that it rarely participates, other than when it 
is young, in the nature of the hexagram. We have seen that sixth lines sit up there on the roof of the house 
and look out over everything and they wonder, "Why bother?" Here, you have a case that is extreme in its 
nature, which is only in the gates of extremes. When the 15.6 has finished its business, the next step is to 
become the 52.1. The 52nd gate is Keeping Still Mountain. It is about being focused and concentrated. It 
is about passive energy and the first line is called Think before you speak, which is the foundation of what 
it is to be still. The foundation of what it is to be still is to wait and to wait until one has the possibility of 
clarity. 

Being that the 52nd gate is the root pressure of the logical process and that we are dealing with the love 
that is inherent in the logical process, this is a very important step between these two. It is so clear in the 
overview of this line, which is called Self-defense. Modesty that is never confused with weakness. Think 
about the children who have the 15.6. They know that they are extreme and they don't see anything wrong 
with that. They see it as their power in life and yet, of course, they will have to deal very quickly with the 
way in which society deals with extremes when they are not at the right time. So, they pull it back, Self- 
defense, and they will go up and sit on the roof of the house and they will not let anybody bear witness to 
their extreme. They will think before they speak. They will wait. They will be still. 

Like all sixth lines, there can always be that moment in the lifetime, young or old, in which the sixth line 
transcends its apathy and becomes involved. After all, that is the wave in the sixth line, apathy/sympathy. 
That apathy can simply go away in the moment where that wisdom, that potential in the sixth line, is of 
value to bring out the extreme because the extreme will actually lead to a pattern that is viable for all of 
humanity. Remember, what we are looking at here is the love that guides us so that the patterns we have 
in the future, we can trust as much as you can. 

Pluto exalted. Constant reexamination to weed out the weakest aspect. Oh, are these people good at 
pointing things out because they are extreme in the sense that, as a sixth line, they can look at the 
spectrum of an extreme. They have a very good eye, in that sense. 

Venus in detriment. A tendency to use harmony as a weapon in problem situations rather than focusing on 
the root causes. In the white book: The power of the Self to ignore the weakest point in favor of harmony. 
Because, very early in their life, they recognize their power, that they are not weak, they always recognize 
weakness. In doing so, they are either apathetic about it or the moment that they are sympathetic about it 
is the moment that they get into trouble. People don't like that pointed out to them. Of course, this is a 
fundamentally social gate. So they sit on the roof. There is no sense in bothering. I will think before I 
speak. 

Keep something in mind about our work in Human Design. It is a logical system and, as such, it is there 
to provide a framework in education for people so that they understand the basic mechanics of their 
nature. The nature of love in the world has nothing to do with hugging and kissing, though all that is very 
nice, but with making sure that people are educated from the earliest possible age. Without that education, 
human beings do not have a possibility to see that what they are is not an embarrassment. What they are is 
not something that has to be refined and improved, that it is not something that has to be perfected 

because it is exactly what it is supposed to be: an aspect of the totality, an aspect of the spectrum of 
things. 

We have a false prophecy about the nature of love. Wre assume that we generate love in the world by 
loving each other. This is a funny thing because this has nothing to do with what this love is all about. It 
has nothing to do with loving your guru, your friend or your dog. It has to be with being one with the 
creative process, accepting surrender for what it is to be you and seeing in that surrender your own 
beauty. Only when you find surrender in your own beauty do you put love in the aura of the world. There 
is no other way. No matter how sweet and nice you are and how much love you have within yourself and 
how much love you want to put out in the world, it is not going to change the aura of our planet. What 
changes the aura of our planet is human beings living their nature. That is the crux of what our work is, so 
that human beings can just live out their nature without the morality, without the conditioning, to see 
clearly what it is just to be themselves. That creates love in the world. We won't see that in our time. 

HEXAGRAM 16 ENTHUSIASM 

One of the things to recognize about the nature of the collective process is that it is all about the difficulty 
in getting access to energy. On one side of the throat are three gates that are pointed directly at motors 
(35, 12, 45) so they become gates in which action is always a possibility. The 20 can connect to the sacral. 
The only gate that points downward other than to the G center, and that does not have any access to 
energy, is the 16th gate. 

It says above the lines of this gate: The great art of enriching life by the harmonic channeling of energy. 
There is no energy. If you go down to the 48th gate, what you have is a gate of depth that is part of the 
splenic system, which is not a motor. Due to that, the talent that is inherent in the 16/48 is a talent that can 
be deeply frustrated because it does not have easy access to energy. 

The 16th gate is very important because it is the primary gate of identification. This is different from a 
gate of identity. We looked at the three gates of identity. They release the identities of direction that come 
out of the Sphinx gates. In the 16th gate, we are dealing with a gate of identification. I have many people 
in my life who have been on the mystical, spiritual path and so many of them who ended up in the hands 
of Eastern philosophy have been told that to identify is a terrible thing. "Do not identifyl" If you have the 
16th gate or anything else in the logical process, if you do not identify with it, you will never master it. 

The 16th gate is the gate of skills. The whole basis of skill in talent is that you have to identify with what 
you are doing. Without identifying with it, there is no way in which you can fulfill it. If you don't identify 
with being an artist, you can never be an artist in that sense. This is an identification that is operating 
mechanically. In other words, for people who have the 16th gate in their design and who are taught that 
they should not identify, they are being told, "Don't identify with your identification." 

But you have to be identified on the mundane plane, whatever it is that you do. Otherwise, an artist or a 
musician has no way to achieve perfection and mastery. Mastery is based on identification. The artist 
needs that deep identification in order to repeat and perfect his pattern. 

Understand something very important about the logical process. You can't dabble in logic. You have to be 
identified with the process, which means extended experimentation in order to develop a clear 
understanding. Unless you are identified with that logical process, you are not going to get the rewards 
from logic. It is not enough to simply say that this is the way the process works. You have to identify with 
that process. You have to get through that process. You have to experiment with it and come out at the 
other end with either proof or disproof of the validity of whatever the pattern is. 

16.1 Delusion 

The first line always acts as a foundation. Here the first line is called Delusion. False enthusiasm. 

The Earth exalted. The daydreamer. One of the things to understand about the nature of these skills is that 
one has to identify with the skills but one does not necessarily get the energy or the depth to be able to 
enrich the skills and turn them into manifestation. Daydreaming is something very important in the 
logical process. We see in the 62.1 that, in order to be able to establish the best detail, one needs to go into 
a fantasy world in order to collect all of the possible information. For example, if you are trying to work 
out the detail of something so that you get other people to understand it, it helps to go through your own 
process, logically, to see how you would explain it and to see whether you really understand your own 
description of it. 

Here, this is about the beginning of skills that are recognized through daydreaming. It is very difficult for 
a 16 to actually get to live out their talent unless they have access to a motor. If they do not have some 
place else to go, they will be very frustrated. So much about the logical process is being prepared for the 
possibility that the energy may be there. That is why you have all these committees doing all of the work 
and preparation in order to get everything done, to get all the daydreaming out of the way, so when the 
moment comes that the energy is available, manifestation is possible. 

In the white book: The expression of talent through daydreaming. That can mean many things. This can 
be a very creative force. But it is also as a musician who does not have to have the instrument in his hand, 
he can hear the music in his head. You can daydream about what kind of configuration it should have, 
how it should be orchestrated, which instrument should be there and so on. That is not just about the 
traditional arts. It is true for anything in the life. 

Mercury in detriment. The public communication of inevitably unrealized claims. "I have the skills to be 
able to do this." That does not mean that the skills are actually going to manifest. The 16 is a throat gate 
which says, "I experiment" or "I don't experiment". Because it is a throat gate, it is always ready to say, "I 
have the skills," without necessarily having the capacity to bring those skills into manifestation. 

In the white book: The tendency to express fantasy as fact. These are people that will say to you, "I have 
this theory and I know that it works." They know that it works because they looked at it in their fantasy 
structure. That is like somebody sitting with a computer and theoretically designing an automobile. It is 
one thing to fantasize that automobile and to create its virtual reality, but it is another thing to actually get 
the energy to turn it into a real vehicle that will drive through the streets. This is the dilemma of a 16 
without a motor. What often happens to these people is that it is so frustrating that they will say that they 
already have the proven experiment out of their fantasy, simply because they never had an opportunity to 
actually manifest it. 

When you daydream, you are looking for patterns and you are experimenting with them. The key to our 
creative logical process is that we go through so many patterns first, within our conceptual nature, before 
we can ever get a chance to actualize them. It is very difficult for any logical process to manifest because 
the access to energy is difficult. 

It is very simple to understand this gate. The nature of this gate is that it dreams to have energy. All that 
daydreaming represents is: How could my skills function if I actually had energy? The same is true for the 
62. How can I express my opinion unless I have all the details? So you try to find all the details. In the 
16th gate, we find the skill to recognize the need for energy. The skills are already there. It is the energy 
that is missing. Because it is fundamentally frustrating, you start off with the first line that says, "All I can 
do is dream to have the energy. " Sometimes that dream can become a delusion when I think that I really 
have access to that energy. 

16.2 The Cynic 

When you get to the second line, you get to those people who project out exactly that skill, "I know who 
has the energy and who doesn't." That is why it is called The Cynic. They burst your bubble. You come to 
the 16 and you say, "I have got this wonderful theory and plan to do this," and the 16 says to you, "it 
won't work. I will not give you my skills because I know that it will not work." That is the capacity 
because the first three lines are not transpersonal; they are only caught up in their own process. The 
second line can be very painful, if you are coming to that second line. You see, the 16, unlike any of the 
other gates, really does not like the 48. It is looking for the 58, which is much further down the road. The 
48 is just depth and the 16 knows that there are all kinds of depth in the world and it can meet all kinds of 

48's in the world. For the 16, it does not make any difference but it asks itself, "Can I turn that into 
something that really manifests?" This is what cynicism means: The sharpness to burst bubbles. 

Sun exalted. Self-reliance and the skill to judge objectively any claim regardless of rhetoric. This is the 16 
saying, "Yeah, but if you had the energy, this would not work." They are self-reliant in the sense that they 
identify with their skill. Otherwise, they say, "Maybe it will work," and then they get caught up in this 
business that it does not work and they feel very uncomfortable and they do not feel talented at all. 

In the white book: The expression of the skill to judge objectively; or the other side: Objectivity 
expressed through cynicism. 

Mercury in detriment. The compulsive cynic, whose very cynicism is a source of enthusiasm. Whenever 
you see this word enthusiasm, please translate that into talent or skills. What this is really saying is: the 
compulsive cynic, whose very cynicism is a source for talent, a source for skills. You come to them and 
say, "Lets do this and that," they say, "No, that will not work. If you had the energy, it just wouldn't 
work." There are many people who will take that and recognize the skill that is being projected on them; 
they will see what will work, or they try to find what will work. 

The other thing is that these people themselves, within their own process, and not simply the cynic that 
penetrates others because they are projecting beings, are very uncertain about their own skills. Again, we 
have the paper tiger. The projecting field does not know the depth inside. The first line knows that it has 
skills and it spends all its time dreaming about how to use them. The second line is just looking out to see 
where the energy is and does not really know the depth of its own skills. So, these are people that can be 
very cynical about themselves and their own talent as well. 

Most of that is rooted in the fact that they have never had access to energy so that they could really 
experiment with their talent. There are so many children who have the 16th gate that is not connected to a 
motor. If you give them a piano lesson, you cannot expect that they are really going to be proficient at the 
piano. It is not going to happen. They will be able to dream about being a great piano player. They will be 
able to tell everybody else who can or cannot play, "This one plays well. This one plays terrible." But 
they, for themselves, will not have this consistent energy and they will not be able to stay with it, and then 
they spend the rest of their lives being frustrated, asking themselves, "Why didn't I finish my piano 
studies? Why didn't I become a musician? I can dream how wonderful that would be because I know that 
the skills are inside of me. " 

The whole talent process can be very frustrating if you cannot get to the energy, and it says something 
important about the nature of talent. As we progressed in the development of our civilizations, we have 
created arts that have now multicomplex, multi-personality art forms exemplified by television and film, 
in which you have hundreds and sometimes thousands of people working together on the same creative 
process. A creative process is a logical process. To get access to all of that energy, you will need a lot 
more bodies around in order to release the magic of what talent can be. It is collective. 

What happens when the sacral center is connected to the 16 is that anybody who has a motor connected to 
the 16 is going to be able to operate in their skills. There is no question about that. We are working in 
streams here. If you have a motor connected to the throat and you have a 16, it is operating, but it is not 
operating 'in the logical way. The way it works is dependent on how the energy is connected to the throat. 
If you have somebody that has the 20/34 Charisma and they have the 16, you know that their Charisma is 
their skill. It will come out in a different way. They have a skill in being able to say "I am." 

16.3 Independence 

When you get to the third line, you get to the line of adaptation. It says Independence. Whenever I see 
anybody with this line, I always tell them the same thing, "You have the skills. All you have to do is wait. 
There is just nothing to do. You have to wait for the energy to come. You can't get the energy yourself 
and you have to stay comfortable with the fact that you have the skills." 

Self-generating and sustaining enthusiasm. Moon exalted. The proper timing to maintain rhythm and 
avoid deflation. In other words, if you have the skills and you do not wait, you will be very frustrated 
because you can't exercise those skills the way you want to. You have to wait for the right energy to come 
into your life so that you can exercise your skill. It is a process of trial and error where you learn to 
recognize who, when they come into your aura, can allow you to manifest and you learn to recognize the 
right timing for things. 

Mars in detriment. The child whose overconfidence... (which lies in the third line, recognizing that it does 
have skills) ...may lead to frustration, and the ensuing dependence on others to regenerate enthusiasm, 
thus creating an unnecessary reliance. In other words, early frustration with this process leads to the idea 
within them that they do not really have the skills and they are very dependent on other people in order 
for any kind of skill within them to manifest. 

In the white book: The independent skill and possible talent to express proper timing and rhythm. The 
word 'possible' refers to the trial and error process. With the 16.3 you have to learn. 

On the other side, we have: The need to have others confirm one's skill or talent. That other side refers to 
situations in which, as a child (the focus here is on the child), the talent gets diminished. The talent can 
get repressed at a very early age because the skills are there and they feel comfortable in their skills but, 
because they do not necessarily have the right energy available to them, they cannot live that out. 
Remember that we are dealing with a throat gate. That means they speak as if they have the skills. It can 
be very embarrassing for them not to have the energy and it simply does not work. 

16.4 The Leader 

When you get to the upper trigram, to the fourth line, you get to the process of externalizing. The moment 
that you get to the capacity to externalize, you get to a transpersonal gate. This 16 knows that there is a 48 
on the other side. It knows that talent is a collective process and it recognizes that the only way that things 
are going to work is if it externalizes its capacity to recognize who has the energy and who doesn't. That 
is why it is called The Leader. 

Genuine and sincere support and recognition of others. Genuine support comes after the recognition. This 
is the 16 that always gets recognized when the other one has the energy necessary, so that there is a 
possibility that what they do together can manifest as talent in the world. 

Jupiter exalted. Enthusiasm for and service to higher goals. Mars in detriment. The demagogue. Well, the 
demagogue ain't pretty but nevertheless, they do the same job. These are people that will guide the 
collective force and give it an outlet in the throat center for manifestation. 

In the white book: The skill to recognize and support the talents of others; or The refusal to support and 
recognize the talents of others. Both of those are built-in because this is the leader that can recognize 
where the energy is. This is the capacity of creative leadership, "I recognize where the energy is and I 
better look after these people, support them, pump them up and make sure that they are ready to deliver 
that energy." The leader is very fixed in finding the energy. The lives of these people are absorbed with 
identifying with energy so that they can get the energy for manifestation. 

16.5 The Grinch 

When we come to the fifth line, we come to the line that gets projected on. The first line tells us the nature 
of a hexagram and the fifth line tells us how the world sees it. This line is called The Grinch. That name 
comes from a children's book by Charles Dickens. The Grinch is like Scrooge: they are not the kind of 
people that give easily. They are very tight in that sense. 

The refusal to share in enthusiasm. In talent. These people are being projected on that they are the ones 
that have the skills, that they are the ones that can get everybody else's depth out. It is always being 
projected on them. "This one has the skills. I'll hook up with this one. I am able to get to the throat and get 
my stuff out. " 

Pluto exalted: The power to avoid enthusiasm for the sole purpose of being converted. As with Dickens' 
Scrooge, eventual conversion leads to greater and more enduring enthusiasm. Here is somebody that has 
skills but he/she is a fifth line and the outside world is saying, "Wow, you have all these skills." They 
need to be told that over and over again. They usually answer with, "Maybe, I don't know." 

The 16.5 can always recognize the skills in others. It is the resonance to the second line, to The Cynic. It 
has the capacity to distinguish who has skills and who doesn't. The 16.5 waits until all that pressure 
comes and, only when others encourage them, are they going to have an opportunity to flower. The 
people who are coming to encourage them are people who have the energy but no skills. They have the 
energy and say, "This is the one that has the skills. Let me project on them that they are really the best." 

In the white book: The lack of confidence in the expression of skills that needs the encouragement of 
others. This is a lack of confidence because it is all projection. "I do not know if I am talented but all of 
you are saying so. I don't have the energy myself and so I don't really know how talented I am. I don't 
really know how good my skills are. You keep on telling me that they are great, but I still don't know." 

The lunar detriment is: The perverse feeling that sharing in enthusiasm hampers individual development. 
"Why should I be happy when...?" this line asks. "Why should I make all of them happy and give all of 
them talent when I still don't feel good myself? Why should I bother? This is only a projection." This is 
the universalization of talent. One of the things that we expect from our artists is that, when they are 
complimented or asked about their art, they all play humble. This is the image of the fifth line. "Yes, but 
there are others who are so much better. The music, the dance scene, the editing could have been better. " 
The nature of the collective logical process is deeply connected to our critical capacity to check it and 
perfect it and to work on it. 

When you have a fifth line, somebody has to recognize your talent and project that on you in order for 
you to have the opportunity to respond to it. That is true for all fifth lines. When the fifth line complains 
that it does not get recognition, you can ask them if they recognize other people. What is underneath here 
is that the fifth line is concerned about finding whether they truly have the skill. They do not care whether 
others have it. People can project onto my 51.5 that I am an initiator but, until I initiate somebody, it is 
nothing but a projection. The fifth line is taking in all this projection and it needs to see whether or not 
that projection has a basis in reality. 

16.6 Gullibility 

When you get to transition in the sixth line, you get to another process. We have seen that sixth lines have 
a resistance to their process because they are looking for something that is much larger in context. When 
we are getting to the sixth line here, we know that it is looking to the whole circuit. When somebody is 

born with a 16, how talent and what kind of talent is going to come out of that 16 is an open book. It 
depends on how you are conditioned. It depends on your culture, your environment, your education and 
training and the people around you. However, you are brought to whatever that talent is. 

The great dilemma for the 16.6 is not the question of where the energy is. They already recognize that 
energy is available. It comes and it goes, but it is available and they know that. They are deeply concerned 
about what kind of skill can actually take that energy and manifest it, so that the experiment can be 
proven and then can be used to guide humanity into the future. In other words, how can they find their 
immortality? How can they find the perfection in the pattern that they are looking for? 

This line is called Gullibility. The susceptibility to propaganda. They start very early in their life being 
susceptible to which skill is really the answer. They are not willing to commit themselves and their talent 
to anything until they can really see that not only will the energy be there, but there are exactly the right 
skills involved to manifest that and bring that out. 

Neptune exalted. The ability to experience, examine and then reject misleading enthusiasm. These are 
people that get pointed towards different talents very early in their lives. This is an ongoing process in 
which they themselves can go through their whole life not really knowing which one, and therefore not 
commit their talent. They do not think that they have the correct type of skill to work with. They have not 
seen a skill yet that can really manifest what they want to manifest. 

On the Jupiterion side: The same principle, but where Neptune will destroy and then seek new forms, 
Jupiter will painfully withdraw, its enthusiasm for social structures permanently prejudiced. This is so 
typical for sixth lines. You get to a point where you do not get to see whatever this ideal is. You don't get 
to see that it is possible and then you get very depressed with that and leave it alone. It is just a matter of, 
"Yes, I have talent but I don't have the skills that I really need," even though the skills are there. 

In the white book: The talent to assess the expression of others; or The failure to assess the expression of 
others. This is the whole nature of propaganda in that sense. It is always about them being pointed 
towards skills until they can get to that skill where they can recognize that it is really them and it works, 
that they can manifest this very skill. Only then will they commit their talent. 

What these people end up being, most of all, are disinterested critics of the arts. They have very good 
mouths. They are connected to the talent process and they end up saying, "That one is not very good 
because their technique is bad. " They walk into a museum and they point at three paintings and whether 
they have been trained or not, they say, "This technique is not very good." Or they go to the opera and 
say, "The baritone is terrible," not that they want to do anything about it. They don't want to go and tell 
them; they do not want to train them or help them. They do not want to write books on criticism. They do 
not want to make their living recognizing all that. There is just this kind of, "Well, that is not good 
enough. That is not quite going to work." This becomes their nature. 

By the way, people who are gullible when they are young become very good in recognizing lies in regard 
to a skill. People who project outwards that they have a skill, the 16.6 can look at it and say "No, no," but 
they won't bother to tell them, correct them or join them in a healing process. 

When you go from the 16.6, you come to the 35.1. Again, we have seen throughout the whole process of 
looking at the collective logic and the collective abstract, how they constantly keep intertwining with each 
other. They keep moving into each other. There is a famous cliche that we have. It is about 'art as an 
imitation of life.' The 16th gate is the gate of art in this cliche and the 35th gate is the gate of life. 

HEXAGRAM 17 FOLLOWING 

We move over to the logic process and we come to the 17th gate. The first thing to recognize is that 
exactly opposite the 17th gate is the 18th gate. They are opposite each other in the zodiac and they are 
both in the same circuitry. They both belong to the logic process and they represent a deep link to each 
other. There is a very important capacity that lies within the 17th gate. 

The nature of this gate is the future for us. What I am teaching you in terms of wave resonance, what I 
teach you in terms of the Human Design System, I often make the comment that it is not for our time. 
This is the time of planting a seed. It is a time of getting people to recognize that this kind of knowledge 
is available to anyone. The nature of this knowledge is so that humanity can be properly organized. We 
can be organized in a way that we can't possibly imagine now because it will be a natural process. Rather 
than education beginning with belief, education can begin with true knowledge, the logical understanding 
of the nature of what it is to be human, one's place in the world, and where one belongs. 

I am involved with many things in my process with Human Design and one of them is called the Global 
Incarnation Index, something I have been working on for many years. When this index will be finished, it 
will outline every possible incarnation that is available to humanity and it will describe it in detail, as any 
index will do. The nature of what the mystics call the Akashic Records is that everybody will be able to 
see at some point where they fit in; it is not for this time. It will be for a time when this knowledge 
permeates the world. It will be a time for people to be able to see exactly where they belong and exactly 
who belongs with them. So the thing to recognize about the nature of the Aquarian Age is that it will 
move from the Piscean teacher (11.4) to the Aquarian teacher who will be symbolized by the 17.4. It will 
be the Personnel Manager. It will be the organizer. 

Recognize about the 17th gate that it has enormous significance for us because this is the teaching of the 
future which has to be deeply rooted in understanding that is of value to human rights, the relationship to 
the 1 8th gate at the other end. If there is anything that is philosophical in my nature, it is the recognition 
that every single individual has to be emancipated; not simply that we emancipate races and gender but 
we emancipate the individual, and we can only do that when the individual recognizes its own nature and 
has its place in the world. This is the ultimate truth for humanity and this is something that will come out 
of this capacity to organize us. The time has not come yet where that is the way in which this channel 
serves the world. 

One of the classic examples of this gate in our time was Baghwan Shree Ralneesh, Osho. He was a classic 
17/62. This is a foreboding, a foreshadowing of what is possible in terms of the capacity to be able to 
organize humanity. But the reality is that organization cannot take place until understanding takes place, 
and the understanding of this process leads to the 62nd gate, which is the gate of the Maya. It is the gate 
of establishing all the names. By the time that we have written all the names of the genome, by the time 
that we truly understand the nature of the mechanics of the universe, when our understanding is complete 
in terms of what is essential to understand, to recognize intrinsically our nature, that is the moment that 
we can begin organizing. Up until that point, including the point that we are at now, this channel, like the 
11, can be just as bizarre because not all understanding serves fundamental human rights. It is a matter of 
fact that a great deal of collective understanding is detrimental to fundamental human rights. This is there 
now in the nature of the 17. 

Earlier, I quoted John Milton from 'Paradise Lost,' which he puts into the mouth of the devil. The devil 
says, "Better to reign in hell than to serve in heaven." This hexagram is entitled Following. The ancient 
law that those who wish to rule must first know how to serve. This is the nature of the 17th gate, that 
understanding must be of service. Only then will it lead to rule, will it lead to the power that 
understanding can bring. 

Remember that the logical process is always trying to establish for us a pattern that we can trust and move 
with into the future. It is a very important pattern for us and for all human beings who are deeply 
concerned: we see that in integration, at the most primary level. There is this fear of what tomorrow will 
bring. Being of service is the need to be able to logically understand that the pattern is secure and that 
tomorrow will be secure. If understanding is not of service to humanity in that way, then the 
understanding can be detrimental. In other words, we have been promised many times by our logical 
leadership that the pattern will secure us into the future, only to discover that it did exactly the opposite. 
So it is something to be aware of: it can also be the devil's law, not just simply god's law. 

17.1 Openness 

This foundation line is called Openness. Mars exalted. The energy to sustain a broad spectrum of stimuli. 
When you are talking about the first line, you are talking about the true nature of the hexagram. Venus in 
detriment. A tendency to limit openness to aesthetically pleasing stimuli. Both of those are about the 
capacity to always have opinions. This is a very opinionated line. 

The exalted is about The possibility of having many opinions. That is the nature of this gate. There are 
many opinions to have. After all, everything that has a name, everything in your vocabulary, you have an 
opinion attached to it; otherwise, you could not have that name in your vocabulary because it comes out 
of opinion. So we have loads of opinions. The 17.1 is full of all of these opinions. 

The other side is: The possibility to limit opinions to what is pleasing. These people have opinions about 
what they like to have opinions about. Things that they are not interested in, they don't have opinions 
about or they do not tell you about them. In other words, their opinions are about things they like to have 
opinions about. These people, for example, have opinions about art. That is what they love to have 
opinions about. They have no opinion about politics. They are very much locked into that because that is 
what pleases them. They want to have a critical capacity only when it comes to art. The 17 is opposite the 
1 8th gate. It is full of challenging authority. It is full of criticism. These are the opinions that are attached 
to every name. The 17th gate entails a built-in experimentation that is taking place within about the value 
that any name has. 

17.2 Discrimination 

We come to projection here. This line is called Discrimination. The benefit of associations based on 
highest values. This line (and the whole hexagram) is always about two things: is one serving, or is one 
trying to rule? Is one serving one opinion, which means that somebody asks you, or the situation asks 
you, are you trying to rule and to impose your opinion? Are you trying to rule with your understanding? 
This is always the dynamic tension that exists within this hexagram, between serving and ruling. Here 
you have the classic in the projection and, as you will see, by the time we get to the fifth line, it becomes 
something quite special. It becomes No human is an island. It becomes something very important to 
understand in our nature. In the second line we have the beginning of this process. 

Sun exalted. The successful achievement of purpose through proper alignment. 'Proper alignment,' in this 
case is: The possibility to develop opinions through relationships. Somebody says to you, "What do you 
think?" Then you can project. If nobody asks you what you think, you can't project. 

When you come to the other side of this, you have the Moon in detriment. An overactive discrimination 
that leaves one virtually alone. The possibility of being opinionated at the expense of relationships. This 
is trying to rule. This is the other side, the side that cannot wait to be asked. They have to project it 
outwards. In the moment of projection, they are trying to rule with their understanding. Please, recognize 

something about that. They may be right. It is always true in all of these gates. Do not bring any moral 
judgment to the fact that they operate through their polarity. Both sides can be right or wrong. But the 
nature of the way in which it works is that they are always trying to rule with their understanding. 

This is a collective circuit. It is about sharing. One can only rule when they serve, which means that you 
have to be asked first. This is the tension that exists in the 17th hexagram. It is much easier for people 
who have the 17 without the 62. The 17 without the 62, by the very circumstance of not having the whole 
channel, has to wait for that opportunity to be asked, or the opportunity that the situation asks them 
because, suddenly, it is activated. It is very different when you are dealing with the 17/62. Like the 43/23, 
it can become an automatic loose canon. It just blurts out and the understanding is imposed on somebody 
else. They may not like that. It may be right or wrong. 

17.3 Understanding 

When you get to the top of the lower trigram, you get to the line of adaptation, the line of bonds made and 
broken, of irresponsibility. It is called Understanding. The awareness that the best road is not necessarily 
the most interesting. The best road for any opinion is towards detail. That is what is meant here. The only 
thing that makes an opinion worthwhile is if it is substantiated by appropriate detail. 

Pluto exalted. The following of the best road provides the experience necessary to meet the challenge of 
the road's end. In the Book of Letters: The understanding that the best opinions are grounded in detail. 
Opinions need to be substantiated; otherwise, experimentation will never take place. Remember the 
difficulty of the logic process to find energy. Only the best opinion has a chance to get and attract that 
energy. If there are any loopholes, they will always come up in the experimentation. 

The Earth in detriment. The taking of short-cuts. One may get to the end quicker, but essential experience 
will be missing. The possibility of skipping details and limiting the value of the opinion. The fact is that 
every time an opinion does not have enough detail, there is always going to be somebody out there (I call 
them the money lenders) that says, "Well, you'd better go back to the committee room because we are not 
ready to invest yet in that experiment because we noticed that you did not have form ZW 21926 done and 
you have to get that form done before we can even consider it." You have to have all of the details. 

17.4 The Personnel manager 

We come to the upper trigram and this line of externalization. It is a one -tracked process, but it is the 
mirror image of The Teacher on the abstract side that we looked at. I mentioned at the beginning that 
what we are looking at is the Aquarian potential to the Piscean teacher on the abstract side. Here it is 
called The Personnel manager. 

Pluto exalted, a lovely place for Pluto. The ability to probe and discover the underlying motivation and 
resources of those who wish to follow. Here we find the gift to be able to really understand others. One 
cannot rule until one understands others. It is essential because to rule means that you must serve the 
other. That is the nature of ruling. That is why the Chinese had this tradition of the superior man as a 
ruler. This superior man served as a ruler. He served the interest of the people above and beyond his own 
interest. This is the nature of true service: as a ruler being the one who serves. 

Jupiter in detriment. The overgenerous and often misguided acceptance of would-be -followers, often with 
disastrous results. The Personnel manager has the gift of being able to say, "Here is the pattern and here is 
where you fit in because I understand what you need." Given the nature of ignorance in the world, this 
can be a very frightening thing in the way in which it actually gets applied and there are an enormous 
number of people that get manipulated this way. 

In the Book of Letters: The possibility of opinions based on the understanding of others. "I understand 
how this works and I understand how it works for you, and in that I can serve you." 

The other side is Jupiter in detriment. The possibility of opinions attracting others. This is really a 
capacity to attract others and bring them to this order. This is all about order. This is the design of an 
organizational being. 

Everything about the mental logic process is figuring out how to get everybody to fit into a cubbyhole, 
something everybody hates. One of the ironies for me is that the ability to see where everybody fits in, 
which is the capacity that lies within this knowledge, would be in many ways deeply offensive to a great 
number of humanity in the sense that it would appear to be manipulation, which it is not. It can only come 
at a time when people really understand from a very early point. 

This is a strong manipulative field: bringing people to understanding through the ability to externalize 
that. But it is a very fixed understanding. This is not universal understanding. This is just externalization. 
It is trying to get your opinion across and it is a gift of attracting people to your opinion. It is very 
common to see that in politics, for example when you have a one-opinion candidate like Le Pen in France. 
He is a one-opinion politician. "I understand that this is bad," and then he works attracting everybody to 
that one opinion. They get very fixed in that. 

17.5 No man is an island 

The fifth line has a special significance. One of the things to recognize about the nature of this line is its 
resonance to the 18.5, which is its opposition. The 18.5 is the line of Therapy; on one side, the capacity to 
both seek and provide guidance, and on the other side, chronic instability and the mental patient. Here, 
you find the mirror of this. This is an important mirror because what the fifth line in the 18 talks about is 
the inability to do it alone. Here, we have the line of No human is an island. The recognition, however 
understood, that there is no end to hierarchies. 

Uranus exalted. Please understand the significance of that. We will have Uranus transiting this gate in 
about 14 years. This will be an enormous event. Uranus exalted: The ultimate creative expression of 
interdependency, whether as god's will or global synthesis. What you see here is Opinions that can 
express the value of being organized, whether mundane or spiritual. 

The greatest service of the logical process is to finally be able to allow everyone to have exactly their 
place in resonance. If everybody is in their place in resonance, everybody has a complete process and the 
totality has a process far beyond that. This is an Aquarian process. That is why you have Uranus here that 
is establishing the exalted. We will have a very important transit of this which will have an enormous 
impact, not in terms of when it happens. The most important thing to see about transits is that every time 
you look at a date in the ephemeris, remember that millions of babies are being born. 

The transit of Uranus through that gate (it stayed there for a year and eight months, and it stayed two or 
three months in that line), will have an enormous impact because all those children will carry it as their 
genetic material. We will have a whole new generation that, from the very beginning, is open to this 
global synthesis, and they will be born all over the world. It will not be limited to any particular place on 
the planet. 

Mars in detriment. The arrogance, despite all the evidence to claim, that the buck stops here. We see this 
in the world today with what fundamentalism is: the last gasp against the globalization that homogenizes 
everything, the world where everything simply gets homogenized and brought together. There is a deep 

resistance to that. On the other side of the Uranian power is the old, primitive resistance to being 
organized and it is the vanity to assume that where you belong in this life is up to you, not God's will, not 
global synthesis. 

The possibility of opinions that refuse to see the value of being organized. It is not about whether these 
people are good guys or bad ones. It is simply about recognizing that there is always going to be a tension 
because we have not reached the point yet where we are socially organized. I can't remember the details 
exactly but they have a scaling system of how to list the social possibilities of species. 

At the highest level of that, it is based on a number of criteria. It is based on three generations living 
together, the ability to communally interact and to support each other in times of stress. It ends up with a 
fourth step which is about the fact that the species is reproduced selectively. So, the highest members of 
this social organization business are ants, termites and wasps. We are going there. These insects are very 
organized. Humanity is very different. We have this enormous self-consciousness at work but where we 
are going towards is this highest level of organization which will really be fulfilled when we have spirit 
awareness and we can create our consciousness outside of our forms. 

But there always will be this resistance. What is coming is a genetic transformation. It is not about what 
you want it to be. We have a genetic transformation at work. There will always be recessive genes. These 
will be the recessives. They will say "I refuse to be organized." They will fight being organized and 
ultimately, some time deep into the next century, we will have this dilemma between those who are ready 
to be organized and those who refuse to be organized. That is going to be the political fault line of the 
future. In order to universalize out of this fifth line, obviously, the pattern really has to work, whatever it 
will be. 

I have a great Mc Donald's story. Mc Donald's opens a new outlet every three hours and in Nov. '96, they 
entered their one hundredth country. The thing that is so fascinating about that is that in the 100 countries 
that now have Mc Donald's, there has never been a war between them. 

17.6 The Bodhisattva 

In the 18.6 we have Buddhahood, the spoilt one. Here, The Bodhisattva is the spoiled one. If other people 
are not there waiting for their pronouncement, they get very upset. They understand what is good for 
everybody and they expect everybody to be there. By the way, they just might. That is the other side of it. 

The Bodhisattva is quite a role. The capacity is truly there, but again, like all sixth lines which are 
transition lines, two things are always there in the transition. One is this sense of not giving what you are, 
not giving understanding because it is not worthwhile. You want something much greater than that. You 
want to see everything organized. It is not enough just to understand; you want to see it immediately 
implemented so you can see all of that organized. That is what is interesting for this sixth line. Most of 
the time, the understanding does not necessarily come out because there is this immediate recognition (no 
energy) that it is not going to be able to get organized. 

Perfected following, one with and the same as perfected leading. Moon exalted. The great nurturer. The 
nature of this position is always positive, (including the detriment). Jupiter in detriment. The tendency on 
the perfected path that it is a straight line that ends, rather than a circle. 

In the white book: The possibility in understanding the nature of interdependence to express opinions of 
value to others. 

But the fact that it is a possibility does not mean that you will do it. This is the kind of being that is not 
going to share their opinion with you if they don't think that you will not do anything about it. The 
moment that you are saying to them, "Give me your opinion and tell me what to do," these people love to 
have people come to them and say, "Oh, Master. What do I do?" The Master sits there and says, "Don't..." 

The role is to organize, if somebody comes to them and says, "Oh, please tell me what I should do?" They 
are ready because the organization can take place. "Let me organize you." But if they can't organize them, 
then they don't do it. One of the things about these people is that they are often deeply attractive because 
they don't offer you the understanding unless you ask them, unless you go to them, unless you express a 
need for that. 

The detriment: Where understanding is achieved, the possibility of having the opinion that there is 
nothing else to learn. These can be very arrogant people. I have met this many, many times with people 
who have the 17.6 and they are astrologers, chakra workers, or whatever esoteric field. They always have 
the same response, "I don't need to understand anything else. I have this." There is always that aspect to 
them as well. 'The tendency on the perfected path' and you think that this is it. 

The whole thing to recognize about the inherent danger in both collective processes is that both of them 
are at the mercy of mutation. The organization of humanity is not going to take place until a mutation 
takes place. This mutation will change the way in which we will reproduce. It will make it very difficult 
for our species to reproduce. It forces us to be organized. This will come out of mutation. 

I was growing up in Montreal in a very nice neighborhood and it got more and more busy as more and 
more people bought automobiles. There were a lot of children in that neighborhood. The adults were 
always saying, "We should really ask the city to put up a traffic light." You know when they put up the 
traffic light? When the first child was killed, that moment, the traffic light went up. So the reality is that 
the way in which that operates is to wait until the mutation takes place in order for that process to change. 

The collective is at the mercy of mutation because everything they thought they understood or every 
experience they thought they had made sense of, all of a sudden, there is something new. In the moment 
that something new is there, that whole process on both sides has to go through a transformation in order 
to try to come to grips with what the new is. The resonance here is in the fifth line because this line is 
going to be ready. The Uranian generation will be ready to cooperate in order to keep the species alive. 

HEXAGRAM 18 WORK ON WHAT HAS BEEN SPOILT 

We move to the third potential in the splenic center which is the 18' gate, the gate of correction, where 
we work on what has been spoilt. It is part of the channel of insatiability. The keyword here is the 
awareness of what is vital or not. If the correction is not going to bring you a sense of value, if it is not 
vital, leave it alone. The awareness potential is to perfect via concentration. This is the place of salt in the 
body. It is where we store all of this possibility for correction. 

The 18 th hexagram is a related to the Oedipus and Electra complex because of its fear, the fear of 
authority. The first authorities we all meet are our parents. This is a natural place for this struggle for 
authority: the conflict between the male and the female and the conflict between same sexes in the family 
structure, this challenge of authority, this generation gap that is here in the 18th gate. 

The heading above the lines in the Rave I'Ching: The vigilance and determination to uphold and defend 
basic and fundamental human rights. It is my standard joke about people having the 18th gate who 
come up to me and say, "Ra, you should not smoke." I answer, "You mean that is true for everybody on 
earth?" and they say, "Yes". This is a collective experience. This is collective correction. 

One of the things to recognize about any kind of collective gate: don't take it personally. So many people 
with the 18 th gate, when you say to them, "You did a wonderful job," they say, "No. I could have done 
this. I could have done that." It is not personal. It is a process. 

18.1 Conservatism 

When you start here with the first line, it sounds like the other lines. The 32.1 is Conservation, the 28.1 
was Preparation, and here we have Conservatism. You can see the basic nature. Remember, every time 
that you look at a line you can see its framework. You know that all first lines will carry with it the need 
to establish the foundation for the whole hexagram. The foundation of the 18th gate is: The adherence to 
traditional patterns despite changing circumstances. 

Earth exalted. Gradual modification to avoid eventual upheaval. Jupiter in detriment. The patriarch 
whose rigidity guarantees deterioration. In the original I'Ching, the 1 8th gate is called 'Work on what has 
been spoilt by the Father'. I am deeply impressed with the mathematics of the I'Ching but not Confucius' 
interpretation of sexes. The fact is that, even in the original, there are several lines that were attributed 
directly to the Mother. In terms of the way that we look at the world and they way in which this works, it 
does not really matter, in that sense. Within the 18 th gate, we will always have that challenge to authority, 
whether it is male or female. 

The potential to correct through gradual modifications of judgments. It is like the way you feel about a 
parent when you are growing up with them and what you feel about them when you become a parent 
yourself. This is the nature of the first line, a totally different process. This is the gradual modification of 
judgments but, basically, very conservative. In the Confucius sense of the word, that conservative 
authority was always the father figure. This is what you get on the other side. You have to recognize 
about this line that, in a woman, it operates through what is yang in her. In other words, it is not really 
about the father and the mother but it is the male and the female. Le., it is the yang in the mother that can 
be operating here. 

The potential to refuse to correct. "My mother was always right," or "My father is always right." It can be 
deeply conservative in that sense. It is trying to set the basis. The basis is that if the authority does not 
have to be corrected, then you have a pattern you can trust. That is what the logic is looking for. It is 

looking for a perfect pattern. A perfect pattern does not need any correction and, therefore, we can safely 
project into the future out of that pattern. 

The person on the detriment side says, "My father's father was right, so I am right." This movement is 
going through there and, because of that, you can say, "You listen to me because he was right with me 
and I am right with you," to establish that authority. 

The potential to correct gradually. "Maybe my father was not always right." What happens in the first line 
is that, because it is setting the foundation, if it is deeply disturbed in the first line, the whole thing falls 
apart. This is all about correcting and challenging authority. First line people are very introspective and 
look into the nature of that and say, "Basically, they were right," or "We have to bring about some slow 
gradual change in that." 

18.2 Terminal disease 

With the second line, we come to projection and we have already seen that there is no sense of the nature 
of the gate itself. There is simply the need to project, the need for correction outwards. That is why it is 
the classic line of the bitch. The moment we have projection without any detail, we get all kinds of 
confrontations and problems that come out of that. 

Terminal disease. The recognition that what has been spoilt is irreversible. There is no way to correct it. 

Pluto exalted: Acceptance and strength derived from a faith in spiritual regeneration. In other 
words, leave all that business about correcting it and see if you can find your own inner quality. Forget 
about the authority that you are so annoyed with. 

In the white book: The acceptance that there is no potential for correction. Not everything needs to be 
corrected and, by the way, that does not have to be bad. In other words, you can just see there is no way to 
correct it, so all right. This thing cannot be corrected, so you deal with other things that can be corrected. 

The other side of this, the Moon in detriment: The futile raging against the wind. "This father and 
mother of mine are horrible and I want to change them. They have to change but they do not listen to me. 
I keep on telling them that they have to change." It does not work. It is just this endless projecting 
outwards. That becomes an illness in and of itself; we are dealing with the splenic system, after all. The 
raging against the wind builds up all kinds of tensions within the body. 

On the other side, in the detriment we have: The refusal to accept that there is no potential of correction. 
They are the people that can drive you crazy because they will not let go of it. They just keep on 
projecting because all second lines are limited in their ability to understand the other side. They do not 
know what it takes to deal with the other side and what the circumstances of the other side are. 

If somebody walks strangely due to a deformity and you want to correct that in them, he/she may have no 
way of changing that. You can scream at them all the time but this will not do any good. There is a point 
in which this can become enormously painful for anybody who has to deal with it and these people will 
turn it on themselves. The 18th gate is notorious for taking itself seriously and getting very personal about 
the nature of what their correction is supposed to be. They can become obsessed: "I refuse. It has to be 
corrected. He has to fix it. The whole world must stop smoking." 

18.3 The Zealot 

We know that the third line has the quality of having the introspective background in it and that it has the 
gift to project that outwards. It recognizes that there is something on the other side of the channel and it 
figures out a way to deal with or to adapt to that. The third line is in the emotional wave of bonds made 
and broken, and when you bring the two elements together, it can be irresponsible; it can get involved in a 
correction and then suddenly quit. That is also a part of it. 

In the third line we have The Zealot. The energetic obsession to clean house. These are very good house 
cleaners. 

Neptune exalted. The dissolution of old forms at an acceptable price. The third gate wants to correct. 
It is equipped. It has its detail, its introspection and its projecting capability. It wants to correct. It is 
obsessed with correction. After all, this is what the gate is all about. If I cannot correct anything else, I 
will sweep the floor and make sure that everything is nice and clean. The willingness is there, no matter 
what the correction is about. 

In the white book: An obsession with correction and its critical potential. Please recognize that, no matter 
how difficult it sounds, our collective would be lost without this because it would have no basis for our 
talents. There is no logic talent without this critical capacity, the perfecting capacity, this need to correct, 
this need to challenge the authority. Everybody would still write music in its original form. Everybody 
would dance the way we first danced. Nothing would have grown without this correcting capacity. 
Nobody would have said, "I judge that to be lousy. Let me show you what is good." 

Jupiter in detriment: Rigid jugdmentation that creates as many problems as it solves. "I know that 
this has to be corrected, whether you like it or not." The 'you' on the other end has to provide the energy 
for correction. If you are the 18 and you do not have the vital energy of the 58, all you can do is complain. 
You don't have the capacity to do anything about it because you are not being energized. 

An obsession with correction that does not bring satisfaction. What happens to the people at the detriment 
level is that they have all this correcting energy and they may get a chance to correct something, but it 
does not take away this "whatever" inside of them that two seconds later says, "Yes, and...? The thing we 
just corrected needs further corrections. Let's correct it more." Adolf Hitler had the detriment of this line. 

18.4 The Incompetent 

When we get to the fourth line, we get to the beginning of the upper trigram. This line is called "The 
Incompetent". The nature of fourth lines is to externalize, which means that these lines are very fixed on 
a specific aspect. In some way, this is very reminiscent of the way in which the second line works. 
Difficulties as a result of inadequacies that cannot be resolved because of inadequacies. What this 
generally means for these people is that they will have a specific thing they want to correct. There are all 
kinds of other things they are able to correct in their life, but the one thing that they really want to correct, 
they can't because they are inadequate to do that. By the way, the moment that they meet somebody that 
has the 48 and they get into contact with The Well, this can relieve inadequacy. The fear of inadequacy is 
in the 48th gate, which is the next step in this stream. 

Remember that we are looking at gates that are potentials in a four gate stream. Here we have the 
potential of this awareness. The thing to recognize is that the awareness alone, this one thing that they 
cannot correct because of inadequacy, can come into contact with the necessary depth. That is always 
possible. All lines can ultimately be the exact mirrors of what they say. 

Earth exalted: Given this negative position, survival through suffering. The inability to correct and 
its potential for suffering. These are people that say, "I just cannot make it better," and they really suffer. 

"I can't fix it. I can't correct it. I can't come up with a solution to this problem. I can't do anything about 
it." 

Mercury in detriment. Indecision and anxiety and no escape from misfortune. The demands of 
correction and its potential to generate anxiety. This constant anxiety comes from having this one thing 
that you can't correct. When you see this line, be very careful about that. Don't see that as meaning that 
they are incompetent with everything. That is not true. So often, when people see this line, they think that 
it is saying that they are incompetent to correct their general process. This is not true. Everything about 
the fourth line is about being fixed. You have to ask these people, "What is this one thing that you want to 
fix, that you can't?" and see that isolated from the rest which you can work with. 

The inability to correct and its potential for suffering; or The demands of correction and its potential to 
generate anxiety. One can become very anxious if there is this one thing that one cannot fix. This is the 
difficulty of the fourth line. 

The fourth line can recognize incompetence everywhere because they know what it is like for them. This 
is true for every line that you read and think, "Oh, my god, these poor people." The lines have their 
positive and negative and every line is a duality. These are processes that we go through. And whatever 
line you have, it is yours. Enjoy it. 

18.5 Therapy 

The fifth line is called Therapy. It is a very important line. After all, we have a collective process here and 
the fifth line is the universalization line. Thus we have a universalized collective process here. It is the 
ultimate of what this hexagram is all about. The interesting thing about this is that when you look at what 
this line says, you realize that what correction represents is that it can be of enormous value or it can 
make you very ill. That is what it is saying. 

The strength to recognize a problem and to accept that it is beyond one 's power to solve it alone. This is 
a collective sharing process. This is the only place where the word 'therapy' exists. So, this has a lot to do 
with what we call therapeutic sciences or work that is done in our society. 

Saturn exalted. The wisdom to both seek and provide guidance. The potential for correction and 
judgment through relationships. This is the universalization of correction. It is about correcting the other. 
The fifth line knows that, apart from the gate, there is a stream and a circuit and it wants to correct others 
and needs correction as well. That is part of its process. That correction is rooted in relationships. 

The Uranian side: The mental patient. Chronic instability and potential madness. Where would the 
therapist be without their crazy patient? And they both have the same line. Think about that, folks. That is 
very funny. The therapist and the crazy patient are the same. I have seldom met a therapist who was saner 
than their patients. It simply does not work. They are simply, subjectively, relatively nuts in different 
ways. They are exactly the same and mirrors of each other, and that mirror is here in Therapy. 

Where relationships cannot assist in correcting the potential of mental instability. The need on one side to 
correct the unstable and the need of the unstable to be corrected by the other: this is all built within this 
fifth line. 

The nature of this hexagram, in the end, is all about the protection of fundamental human rights: to find a 
common ground in which it is possible for us to have a secure pattern which we can live in the future so 
that we can evolve safely. This is all about finding the solution. Here you have somebody who is always 

ready to correct the other. They are not ready to correct themselves. In the detriment, you have the other 
that is waiting for them to come and correct them. They all belong in the same bag. 

18.6 Buddhahood 

When you get to the sixth line, you get to the top of the house. You get to the roof. This line is called 
Buddhahood. It says: The perfected form. These people assume that everything is correct, whether it is or 
not. 

Mars exalted. The Buddha state of the eternal child and the energy to find new horizons to avoid stasis. 
"Everything is correct. Everything is great. What else is going to happen in this life? Where are we going? 
What is in the future for us?" 

Moon in detriment. The mundane application of the above. The ability to tap public opinion and share 
methodology. "Let me tell you why my life is perfect." That is the nature of Buddhahood. 

The potential of the perfected form through correction. Nothing needs to be corrected. Everything is okay. 
The other side of this is: The potential to share the values of the correction with others. "Let me tell you 
why." 

By the way, if you have this in your design, whether you are male or female, you need somebody who is 
much more mature than you, who is older than you as a lover. This is really about the child in its 
relationship to authority. It is very much, in a sense, the young child's way of looking at life. Everything is 
correct and okay. If you ask them why they feel so good, they will tell you that the grass grows green. 
They will share their methodology with you. They are not interested in this corrective process. What they 
really want is to be spoilt. This is not work on what has been spoilt. This is: please spoil me. Buy me nice 
presents. Take me out to dinner. Treat me like a child. Give me my bath. They get what they want out of 
everybody. If you look at the fuel at the other side, it is called Getting carried away. It can be very nice 
except that you have to serve them all the time. 

HEXAGRAM 19 APPROACH 

The 19th gate is a gate of wanting and needing. As you have seen, the fuel in the 41 fuels our 
evolutionary process in sequences and the fuel in the 39 provides essential energy for the mutative stages 
of that evolution. The 19th gate is about making sure it fuels having the resources necessary to maintain 
all of that. 

Those resources (we are dealing with a mystical channel here, the 19/49) are about mundane concerns 
(how many sheep are in the fields, how much corn is growing), but is also spiritual. It is the beginning of 
our religious process. It is the gate of animism. It is the gate where we worship the spirit in animals. 
Because of their sacrifice, we can benefit from their energy by eating them. The 19th gate is a fuel that is 
the energy to need or not. 

Recognize that this is the pressure to have resources because it is in a pressure center. Anybody that ever 
has been in a tribal environment, anybody that has ever been married, or anybody that has ever been 
involved in co-support with somebody, understands the pressure of having the necessary resources. All 
tribal relationships are rooted (no pun intended, but it is there) in the pressure to have the resources that 
are necessary. It is important to see the power that lies in that gate: what resources does the tribe need? 

Above the lines it says: That all things are interrelated is apparent and manifested through the action of 
approach. The tribe recognizes the tribal bond. It is apparent. It is obvious that you have to support each 
other. Otherwise, things do not work. In other words, everything is interrelated as long as there are 
enough resources and the moment that there is a lack of resources, everything falls apart. 

I know that so well. For example: the North of Spain. I love Basque country. It is very beautiful and there 
are some extraordinary villages to the west of Bilbao. These villages are locked away in picturesque 
mountains. Magnificent, ancient stone houses, huge houses that were meant for families with 10 or 12 
children, dotted all over the landscape. They are all empty. The village, its culture and its life is gone. It is 
gone because the resources were no longer available. 

Remember that the resources in the 19 are not just the obvious, that we have to have enough to eat. Where 
are the other things we need? The resources are things like education. As soon as Spain entered into the 
modern European circle, the value of education for the young became something universalized and 
something that was accentuated. These children, growing up in these tiny little villages, started to move 
out into local colleges and universities. They saw different horizons that were not available for them in 
their villages and suddenly, it was over. Thus, we have all the empty houses in this beautiful landscape. 

Understand how important it is that everything is interrelated if there are enough resources. That tells you 
about the nature of the world. It is easy to say that we are all brothers and sisters, united as one. 
Everything is obviously interrelated as long as there are enough resources. If everybody has enough to eat 
and has shelter, if everybody has opportunities relative to their skills and potentials, then you have an 
interrelated, peaceful world. 

It is very important to understand that the resources have to be there. This is the pressure to make sure 
that the resources are there because, without them, everything is no longer interrelated in operation, even 
though it is in fact. If there are not enough resources, the tribe will disband and the group will fall apart. 

19.1 Interdependence 

The first line is the foundation and it always gives you the essential truth of a hexagram. Here, the first 
line is called Interdependence. 

The Sun exalted. The successful approach that does not lose its individual character in acceptance. At the 
other end of the channel, you have the 49, the gate of Revolution, of principles and of rejection. It is an 
emotional gate. When resources seem to be available one moment, they may not be there the next 
moment. 

In the white book: The pressure of wanting without losing one's identity when being accepted by others. 
Others are always involved here because this is all about support. But the reality is that simply because 
one needs to have resources does not mean that one gives up one's nature in order to get those resources. 
This is very important. In other words, the tribe is not meant to be homogeneous. The tribe allows for 
individuality, for difference, as long as everybody is contributing to the resources, which can then be 
available for all. 

When you get to the other side of this energy, we have the Moon in detriment. The tendency, once an 
approach is accepted, to get stuck in continued reflection at the expense of continued development. It is 
not just about wanting to be needed. It is not just about resource of food, spirit, religion. It is also the 
resource of having a partner. Remember that this is the channel of the bride and groom. This is all about 
creating the initial bargain that creates the foundation of how any kind of tribal relationship is going to 
work. 

In the white book it says: The pressure for acceptance which fears eventual rejection. The 19th gate flirts 
because it is looking for the possible resources at the other end. The moment that those resources are 
offered, it may not be the real thing. It may be momentary. The resources may be there and, later, they are 
not because the 49th gate is moving in a wave. 

The recognition about the first line is that, yes, there is interdependence, but there is no dependency. If 
you go into any man/woman relationship anywhere on this planet, you will come to this place: are we 
interdependent, or is one of us dependent on the other? This does more damage to relationships than 
anything else. It is fundamental in establishing the nature of the tribe. Are we interdependent? Are we 
allowed to be our own selves within our support for each other or is that support based on one being 
dependent on the other, as we well know? The vast majority of relationships have been based on 
dependency instead of interdependency. 

Here you have the fundamental theme for marriage, for the bonding of people in a life work together. This 
is the fundamental dilemma. Is it going to be interdependent, or is it a dependency? You can see very 
clearly that, the moment there is dependency, there is a loss of identity. In the moment of dependency, 
one has to go against one's own principles because one is dependent. Thus, they no longer have the power 
that exists in interdependency. 

19.2 Service 

The second line is all about projection. You can see that this second line is the one that has a highly 
valued title. It is called Service. If you wonder how they chose the priestesses for temples, the little boys 
and girls that were the reincarnated Lama: these are the children that were usually pulled out. These are 
the ones that get automatically recognized by those who are sensitive as being ready to serve at some 
level, if you go down a "road lined with begging kids, it will be the child that has the 19.2 that you 
address with, "You come. I'll feed you and you'll do some things for me." That is the one that is projecting 
out, whether it is true or not, that they will be of service in return. Never forget the bargain. They are of 
service in return for the resources. The resources have to be there but they are ready and willing to serve. 
The dedication of personal resources as a result of external contact. Personal resources are: "You use your 
body and I will feed you. You will work in my fields." 

Jupiter exalted. Dedication and service to the highest values. Mercury in detriment. Protracted indecision, 
but given the nature of this position, eventual compliance. First we have the resistance to being of service, 
to being a servant in order to get access to the resources. In our age, we do not have this so much, but in 
the past, there were always indentured people, people who worked for other people, who were not given 
salary but food, and lived as part of that community in return for their labors. This form of service is very 
ancient. It is indentured labor in that sense. It can also be at the highest level. 

The energy to want to be of service. That is projected out. That is why these people are chosen when they 
are very young, so that they can be conditioned to that for the rest of their lives. They project out, "I will 
be of service." Thus, they end up being of service. They end up being servants. They end up being of 
service, but not necessarily for the highest values. 

On the Mercurial side we have, The need to be wanted that will eventually turn its energy to service. In 
other words, the only way for these people, no matter how much they resist, is that they finally have to be 
of service in order to get the resources. Otherwise, they do not get in on the bargain and they are left out 
of the tribe. If you are left out, you have no life anymore. This was the tribe's greatest weapon. There is 
nowhere you can go if the tribe leaves you out: this 49 who says, "This one? No. Send them away." 

We are dealing with a Mystical channel here, so we can never discount the fact that what is of mundane 
service ("I will be of service if you will really reward me; I will give you the best service, if you can give 
me the best reward.") can also be spiritual. It can also be the priestess that says, "I will serve my goddess 
but I really want to be rewarded for that." The reward, in the spiritual sense, is that they will touch me, 
that they will contact me, that they will fill me with their power. That is also part of it. 

This is the beginning of our whole religious experience, which is also in this service. Somebody who 
naturally was projected on that they would be of service, "Okay, you service this temple to this goddess," 
will spend their life at it. They develop this higher principle service. It is built into these people that they 
are the ones that are selected in life to be of service. 

It can be quite frustrating. If somebody comes and projects on them, "You can be of service," afterwards, 
it turns out that they are not really. They are just pulled into that situation. If they do not really work 
because they may not be right for that kind of service, then it falls apart. Then they have great difficulties. 
Indentured labor is not slavery. There are always possibilities that at some point they can buy themselves 
out, though it is a very difficult process. 

This is where tribal prostitution is. Tribal prostitution is different from collective prostitution. Temple 
prostitution or prostituting oneself for the benefit of the tribe. The nature of this is being brought into 
service and made dependent. You can end up having to do things for the benefit of the tribe to get your 
resources. That is not a comfortable thing to be involved in. 

19.3 Dedication 

We come to the theme of trial and error and bonds made and broken. Here we are dealing with this theme 
within the context of support and the need for resources. This line is called Dedication. It is about being 
dedicated to needing those resources. No matter where you go with a 19, you are not going to escape this 
deep need for the resources, whatever the resources happen to be. 

Receptivity to approach can only be maintained through vigilance, being on guard. It is one of the things 
to understand about the nature of being dedicated, that it is not simply a matter to need to have the 
resources but, in order to get them, you have to stay with it. You have to be vigilant. You have to guard 

and protect it. If you figure out how to condition animals (that is part of this stream), how to get sheep to 
live in your backyard, it is not enough that you have them there and you know that you can eat them. You 
have to guard against them being taken away as well. In other words, you have to remain vigilant. This is 
not a one shot abstract experience where you grab the money and run. It means that you are stuck, that 
you are hooked up. It means that you are locked into a tribal obligation. Thus, vigilance is necessary. 
Otherwise, the resources can never be maintained or held on to. 

Venus exalted. The natural ease with which communion is maintained. Think about this: the natural ease 
with which communion is maintained, but not the resources. These people are so dedicated to needing the 
resources that they have no problem with other people in the tribe. It is surprisingly easy for them to make 
the relationships, but they do not really work out. They are a third line and make mistakes because it is 
not about the relationship. It is about whether or not the relationship can manifest, can bring about the 
resources. It does not matter who your associates are, but if you want to feed yourself and you want to 
live, you will have to have associates that will bring you to that. It requires vigilance, not simply just 
skills of being ready to support others or be supported. 

Moon in detriment. A tendency to moodiness... In this sense, it is all about sensitivity, the emotional field 
of this stream. ...that may lead to carelessness. 

In the white book: Sensitivity and ease fueled by acceptance by others. It is all very easy if somebody 
accepts me. I can be there with them, but the resources, that is where the vigilance is. It is not about how 
many friends you have. It is about how productive your relationships are in that sense. It is not about how 
many people are in the tribe. If 99 % of them are on the dole, the tribe is starving. It is not just about 
having the numbers in terms of people. This is the trial and error. 

The other side is, The need to be wanted hampered by oversensitivity. This oversensitivity is an enormous 
theme in this stream. It always has to do with resources. These people only become oversensitive when 
there are not enough resources for them. This is the other side of this line. It does not matter how many 
people are around. One becomes very sensitive, oversensitive as a potential, when the resources are not 
adequate for the need being offered. "Here I am. I am offering my support. Where are the resources? I 
give my support to you and you all have access to it." Then they get oversensitive: "What about me? You 
left me out? Am I in this bargain? Don't I get my cut?" This is the third line. It has to learn that it is not 
about numbers. 

The tribe is always stuck in numbers, this mundane aspect of being able to make more money for your 
work. It is not about how many people are there. It is the value inherent in the relationship. Is everybody 
in the tribe productive? Is the tribe truly interdependent or do we have a tribe that is based on 
dependency? Two people work and one person takes a ride. What kind of a tribe is that? The third line is 
saying, "Heyl You have to learn to see that not everybody is going to pull their weight." That is why there 
is so much flirting in the 19, trying to see who really does pull their weight, who really can carry through 
the vigilance and bring it to fulfillment. 

19.4 The Team Player 

When you come to the fourth line in the upper trigram, you really get to clearly see the resonance from 
the first line. The first line was about interdependency, or dependency. When you come to the resonance 
in the fourth line, you come to the power of single-mindedness, this fixed externalization in the fourth 
line. It is about The Team Player. Individual approach which attracts and accepts cooperation. 

Mars exalted and at its best; there is no other place in the Rave I'Ching that has such a comment on a 
planet. The power and energy for outward activity, and the ability to accept others as long as they can 

keep up. A driving force that can benefit the whole group. In the white book: The energy to seek out and 
exalt in the company of others. These are driving forces. "Where will we get those resources$ Come on. 
Let's do it." They are the ones that can bring this enormous energy to work as an interdependent energy. 
They bring their own, as long as everybody can keep up. 

When you come to the other side, you get to see what happens because it is Venus in detriment. Attractive 
and cooperative, but a tendency to dissatisfaction with the contribution of others. "They are dependent on 
me." Not the first line that says, "I am dependent on them." This is the other way around. "They are 
dependent on me and I don't want them to be dependent on me." That is when they become sensitive. 

A sensitivity energized by the limitation of others. "Why should I do all the work? I don't mind working 
and doing my share, but are you doing yours?" These people are very fixed. If you go to school with this 
kind of person and you get a summer job with them, the last thing you want to do is to work with them. 
They work hard all the time. They put in eight hours of hard work and the other person is wondering 
whether they are all right. "Don't work so fast. I want to have a cigarette. I want to have a rest to 
meditate." So, what happens is that they feel like everybody is being dependent on them and they have to 
carry everybody's weight. 

19.5 Sacrifice 

The fifth line, the line of universalization, is how everybody else sees the hexagram, or how they project 
onto the hexagram. This is the line of the dead. Think about what that is like: You are a commander in the 
fields and you have to take some hill away from the enemy. There are only two members of your troop 
that are going to stand out to you automatically: the 19.2 and the 19.5. The 19.2 will be of service because 
they are projecting out, "I will go and do it." But you also know about the 19.2 that there is a limit to what 
they will do because they are expecting a resource in return. Therefore, they will do only so much and go 
no further. The 19.5 is a bargain for a commander because a 19.5 is quite ready not only to be of service, 
but to sacrifice themselves in that service. And in the larger context of the movie, they do not get any 
resources for it other than a medal that is placed on their grave. In other words, they are quite willing to 
sacrifice themselves without any need for resource in return, and remember, that is not their true nature. 
That is what is projected on them. 

The projected field wants to see the 19th hexagram, this need, as a readiness to sacrifice. "Why should I 
pay you? Do it for the benefit of the tribe. Why do you need resources? Make a sacrifice. Take a day off a 
week and work for the state for nothing." You have countries in our century that have done that. Everyone 
has to take a day off. At least it is not three days a week to build the pyramids but nonetheless, the 
sacrifice is inherent here. When you see somebody with a 19.5, there is a Christ complex at work in there. 
This sacrifice for the higher good is projected on them. "This one will make the sacrifice. This one will 
bleed for the cause. This one will die." This is projected on them. Given the right principle, they will. 

The need to limit personal potential in order to achieve a larger goal. "I will die so that others may live. 
I'll die on this cross, so all of you can be redeemed for your sins." This is the basic theme. It goes back to 
the sacrifice of children. When they were going to sacrifice children for the fertility festival in the 
springtime, the 19.5's were sacrificed, and all spotted by the 49.5. I am a 49.5. I know them when I see 
them. "This one over there can be sacrificed," and the 19.5 will come forward and say "yes." 

The Mayan culture had ritual sacrifices. Most of the time, those sacrificed were criminals and border 
tribes but they had certain numbers to be sacrificed because mathematics was very important. There were 
times when there were not enough numbers to fill the list of those that had to be sacrificed, and there were 
people who would come forward and agree to be sacrificed. "I have to make a sacrifice for the greater 
good because, if I don't die, the tribe will have a problem and the magic of the tribe will die." 

The Earth exalted. The self-restraint fundamental to such a nature. If you will sacrifice, you have to be 
very clear about what kind of sacrifice you want to make. Fifth lines have great opportunities in life 
because they are projected on. They are recognized for an inherent trait within them. In this case, these 
people can make enormous sacrifices for the societies around them and get almost no return on that. They 
are part of what keeps the tribe alive and, in our time, this energy is very important. We expect sacrifice. 
Think about how millions and millions of people in this century walked off and sacrificed their lives in 
wars. "I will fight communism. I will sacrifice my life." 

Jupiter in detriment. A tendency in sacrifice to condescend. "I have to do it for them because they cannot 
do it themselves. After all, they can never hang on the cross long enough." 

Sacrifice can fuel a lack of sensitivity. Those who are constantly asked to sacrifice, because that is the 
projection, become desensitized after a while due to the role that they have to play. One of the most 
important things for anybody who carries the energy of the 19.5 is to recognize that this sacrifice is 
always going to be essential but only for the correct principle. This is a dilemma because the principle is 
an emotional principle that moves in a wave. This is not an easy thing. We are ready to sacrifice one 
moment to spare ourselves from Catholics, or the Nazis, and the next moment, they are suddenly 
acceptable. One has to be careful about the principles one is ready to sacrifice for. That is a key here. 

There is no choice. You can only care in the sense of being aware of what it is. All mammals have the 
19th gate. They will make those sacrifices and die. They do that quite regularly; it is built in. It is built 
into us, too. We exalt it and take it to another level because we take it to a higher principle. We bring in 
the emotional field and the potential for Spirit. 

There will be a time in which this sacrifice will be very different, like all things. The moment that the 
nature of the emotional system changes, we will change the nature of sacrifice because who decides about 
who gets sacrificed or not is the 49th gate which operates in an emotional wave and is not aware. 
Therefore, those sacrifices are unusually cruel and meaningless. Stalin says, "Kill all the Gulags." So you 
go into the Ukraine and kill millions of people and you take all of the crop for four years in a row and sell 
it on the foreign market. Thus, they starve to death. For what? This is when the principles of the 49 go 
haywire because they are being ruled by an emotional wave and there is no awareness and no spirit 
consciousness. 

Sacrifice in our times is still something that can be very sad. It can also be beautiful because we glorify it. 
Our tribes are built on our martyrs. Wherever you go, there is somebody who has done something for the 
state, the last offender of the wall. We consider these people heroes at the highest level because they were 
ready to sacrifice for the benefit of others. That is what we expect from them. What they are is either 
interdependent, or dependent. 

19.6 The Recluse 

One of the extraordinary incarnation crosses in the wheel is called the Cross of the Four Ways. The Cross 
of the Four Ways is comprised of the four hexagrams that are especially about a way, and they form a 
perfect cross in the zodiac. The 19th hexagram, Approach, is directly opposite the 33rd hexagram, which 
is called Retreat and, exactly at a quarter angle from that, you get the 24th hexagram in Taurus, which is 
the gate of Return. Exactly opposite that, you have the 44th hexagram, Coming to Meet. These are the 
four ways of the world: Approach, Retreat, Coming to Meet and Return. So when you are dealing with 
the 19th gate, you are dealing with something very deep inside of you because it is one of the ways. This 
way is a deep recognition for the need for resources and there are all kinds of resources. 

When we get to the sixth line, we get to the transition. We know that all our religious experience begins in 
the 19th gate. It is the gate of animism and animal sacrifice. It is the gate of child sacrifice. It is where 
ideals are built. This is the whole beginning of that process and its culmination is The Recluse. 

This sixth line of the Recluse is trying to see the whole process. It does not want to engage unless it has 
that kind of assurance that the whole process is possible. The whole process of the tribe is that the 
resources have to be enough to allow the tribe to flourish and grow and to develop a civilization, a 
successful thriving community, where everybody has the resources that are necessary and it all gets to 
manifest out of the throat. This is not an easy business that starts in the 19th gate. 

The overview line: The avoidance of contact in general but not exclusively. "1 don't want to be 
interdependent with you. I don't want to be dependent on you. I don't want you to be dependent on me 
because I don't think that any of this will be worthwhile. Why should I give up all this energy when I do 
not get the resources that I know are necessary?" Someone says, "Why don't we establish an ashram?" 
The recluse says, "Excuse me. I am going away because I don't think that it will be possible that you'll 
really bring in the resources to maintain this, to build a culture." 

Jupiter exalted. The fool on the hill. The sage that, if you can find him, will talk to you. These were the 
main spiritual figures in the world. These were the crazy ones, the ones that separated themselves and, at 
the same time, the tribe found them fascinating because the tribe also needs that resource. 

Please understand that the recluse is not quite the same as a hermit. A hermit is somebody where people 
really know where they are. The recluse or the sulking child can be anywhere; you have to look for them. 
It is part of their way to have proven that they are really needed. "I hear that there is a Master in the 
mountain somewhere, but I don't know where. " That is their way of knowing that you really need them, if 
you go looking for them. The sulking child does not simply just go to its room. It goes out and hides 
somewhere outside and you really have to find them to prove that you need them. 

In the white book: The energy which generally fuels avoidance. "Well, I don't want to support that. I don't 
want to get involved in that because I don't think that it will ever get to where it must." What happens is 
that these recluses, these sages, eventually get sought out. The tribe wants access to what they have. The 
tribe is interested in their resources. The tribe wants them to make a commitment. 

The other side of this: Oversensitivity to rejection that fuels avoidance. This is Mars in detriment. The 
sulking child. The self-imposed exile that will only end when it attracts appropriate and soothing reaction. 
Of all the lines of the 19, this is the only line in which the 19 is totally in control. The 19 needs to be 
wanted but the 19.6 will not flirt, though the 1 through 5 will. The 19.6 generally has a fuel which says: 
"Avoid all that. Don't get their attention." When somebody comes to the fool on the hill, to the sage or to 
the sulking child in its room, they are convinced that they are actually needed. "You climbed all the way 
up this mountain up to see me?V 'Yes, Master." "You finally come into my room to see what I mean, to 
see why I am so upset?" 

There is a great deal of power in this 19.6 by not bringing the classic 19 energy and offering it. Remember 
that the projected field is sacrifice. You are supposed to be there to sacrifice. The 19.6 does not care. 
"Come and find me, if you really need me. And if you show me that you really need me, maybe, if you 
are lucky and it is a nice day, I will offer you my energy and support." 

To so many people who climb that mountain and get to the Master and ask him what they should do, he 
answers, "You can go back down now." If you finally go into the room of the sulking child, it says: "Get 
out." It is not enough to be needed. Again, the sixth line is always asking for something much more. So 
the Master on the hill will wait for the right question, that not only is it really going to be needed, but that 

need is legitimate, and if it can hear the legitimacy of that, it can support that. The sulking child has to 
feel the real need, not simply the tribe trying to discipline the child so that it does not miss for aid. That it 
is not forced to come back out. It has to be a real need to resolve whatever it is. 

It is very important to see that in the whole 19th gate lie so many things that have dominated our lives. It 
is a core fuel: this need for food, the need for how we can share the food and be interdependent in our 
process. All the fundamental rules for whether we will support each other or not, the amount of service 
and sacrifice that is demanded by any tribal relationship, all of that in the 19 carries a great deal of weight 
in the world. We are going through a process of having this energy vitalized. We have a considerable 
transit movement through the gates we are talking about, to see how important it is that the resources are 
there. 

The one thing that is clear to me about the nature of the world is that, unless you satisfy the 19 as a 
universal theme that is everywhere, there will never be peace. The 19 must be satisfied. The resources 
must be there and it must be fair. It must be clean and interdependent. That will take a long time for the 
emotional system to change so that we can break through the motor, and then we can begin to see that the 
nature of community lies in its spirit. The spirit is the whole thing. 

There are different kinds of sages: there is the sage who tells you, "You can go down the mountain but if 
you want, you can come back." Each time you come up the mountain, he tells you to go back down. 
Eventually, they have a satori climbing the mountain one day. They never get to the top and they never 
have to. 

One last spiritual note on that. What the recluse says when you find them is, "I don't need you." The 
whole thing about this need for resources is that none of these people can have a life unless they have the 
resources. There are always those who say, "I don't need to have you in my life in order to have a life. I 
don't need to support the tribe in order to get the resources. The resources are everywhere." This is 
something very important because without this force, the whole thing that drives the tribe will only be 
limited to the material plane, only to that materialism that ultimately finds its expression in the 45/21. 
What lies here is something deeper that says, "Wait a minute. Is it really all about need? Is it only about 
need? There must be something else." There is something else: individual awakening in the 25/51. This is 
the natural way for this sixth line. The sixth line knows that there is something else other than the material 
plane. 

HEXAGRAM 20 CONTEMPLATION 

In many ways, we have here the most complex hexagram in the throat process because the 20th hexagram 
is not simply looking to the potential of a harmonic gate. It is part of the Integration network. It is looking 
at three different gates. It represents the expression of the individual capacity to survive. 

It is the voice that says, "I know I am," or "I know I am now," and all the configurations that come with 
the various connections in Integration. This 20th gate is the only so-called existential gate. Existential 
means that it operates in the present. 

Above the lines it says: Recognition and awareness in the now which transforms understanding into right 
action. This is awareness in the now, so there is a great deal of confusion about this statement, 
'recognition and awareness'. This is not an awareness gate, so do not get carried away by that. This is a 
mechanical gate that brings you into the now. It is a mechanical gate that has direct access to awareness, 
to the 57th gate in the splenic system and the potential for awareness, in that sense. What is important 
about this is that this represents a peripheral mechanic in which the present is recognized. This is not a 
force like the collective force that is either projecting into the future or looking at the past. This is 
something that is occupied entirely in the present. 

20.1 Superficiality 

The first line gives you the foundation. It is called Superficiality. Many people have problems with this 
first line. A reliance on shallowness. If you own a cat, it is easy to understand. The cat is sitting there in 
the now and is really lbakimg disinterested in everything.. It seems to be totally disinterested but it is not. 
It is being very superficial on the surface. It looks very shallow at what it is; doing but all of its antennae 
are ready and alert- for anything,, at any moment. This is not about being in the now and walking around, 
trying to swallow everything. This is the recognition that you are always in the now and you can go, about 
the business of your life because there is this force inside of you that will make contact with the 
periphery. 

Venus exalted. The raising of superficiality to an art form. The sloganeer. In terms of the white, book: 
Superficial expression as an art form. These people are very aware of what is happening one the. 
mundane plane! around them. That is their superficiality. They are very dear about what is going on in the 
world around them because the primary nature of this is to keep them alive. So they are aware of what is 
going on around them but if you have a conversation with them,, iit will be very superficial.. It is like "Do 
you notice the change in the!weather$'iust a little while ago, there was ai change in the pressure." They 
talk about the kinds of things that they are! aware of in the present, and they-will seem very superficial. 
They are not. Don't confuse the way in which these peoplb project out their " 1 know" as. of they are really 
only on the surface. They are not.. There is; a great deal going on underneath. 

The Moon in detriment. The superficial expression of the personality. In the white book: The expression 
of the superficial personality. These people look like only beings on the surface and anybody who knows 
these people all say the same thing: "They are very superficial." I want to tell you something. You put 
these people in a situation of life and death and they are anything but superficial. They are aware in the 
now. They have this mechanical capacity in the now to respond to what is there in the now. But on the 
surface, they are on the surface almost all of the time other than in those moments of threat. That is the 
nature of being in the now. There is nothing to do except in the moment of threat. To respond and to be 
able to protect yourself in order to survive is the capacity in this gate. 

20.2 The Dogmatist 

Page 1 C 

We get to the line of projection. These people are projecting out their existential potential. They are 
projecting out that they know who they are. "I know I am," or "I know I am now," is the voice. This line 
is called The Dogmatist. Restrictive and intentionally limited understanding. These are people in the now 
but what they are projecting out in the now is a narrow field. They see certain things in the now but they 
do not see everything in the now because they do not have this entire periphery. Due to that, they can be 
very dogmatic about that now and that view that they have. 'Restrictive and intentionally limited 
understanding' is limited perspective in that sense. 

Venus exalted. The limitation, if personal and exclusive, is less negative through ascetic withdrawal. In 
the white book: A restrictive awareness in the now. What happens to these people is that they are going to 
bang into a lot of difficulty because they are individual, after all. Individuals always attract attention and 
individuals have to explain themselves. They have this narrow view. What happens to them is that other 
people try to bring them out into the periphery and they are very uncomfortable and back away. They 
back away because they are only interested in those people that are interested in their dogmatic view 
because that is what they need. They need people who pay attention to that. 

Moon in detriment. The power to lead others down a narrow path. Everybody that carries the 20 carries 
with them the possibility to lead people in their survival process. These are people that can guide you 
down a path but it is a very specific path. It is very narrow. By the way, narrow is not a pejorative. 
Narrow is not a bad word. To be led down a narrow path: if you have somebody who is teaching you how 
to be a neurophysiologist, you don't want somebody who teaches you Jimi Hendrix every half hour. You 
want this narrow path so that you can go down that road and learn from that. 

The gift through expression of leading others down a narrow path. "I know right now what is good for 
you. " Again, they may or may not. They may really know what is going on in the now or not because they 
can be a paper tiger. It is all a projection going out. Their favorite expression is, "My way or the 
highway". 

20.3 Self-awareness 

We are dealing with an individual process here, so we are not dealing with the collective process. We are 
not dealing with anything other than this deep empowerment to be individual. In the 12.3, there was this 
potential for exaggerated self-hatred due to the trial and error process. Here we have Self-awareness. 
These are people who are only conscious of themselves in the now. They are always seeing their own 
process going on, so they are very self conscious. They are really there, existentially watching their 
movie. Out of that can come great wisdom. If you really watch yourself, you see what happens to you, 
and what happens to you is your life. It is something very valuable. 

Understanding derived horn analysis of personal actions and effects. The proper attunement and 
development of the personality through self -consciousness. On the other side, we have: Self- 
consciousness in the extreme that hampers development. People are so concerned with what they are 
doing in the now that they don't function properly anymore. This is the other side. They are so concerned 
about what is going on around them in the now that they literally don't have the ability to maintain their 
individuality or individual integrity in those situations. 

The expression of self-conscious awareness in the now; or The expression of self-consciousness in the 
extreme. These people are very uncomfortable. You don't see yourself. After all, the individual is 
projecting out from inside of them, just like everybody else. What they are watching is the wave effect 
between themselves and the world. In doing so, individuals discover that most of the world does not want 
to have anything to do with them because they are strangers by their very nature. 

Page 2C 

So there is this inherent self -consciousness in all individuals. All individuality carries within it this self- 
consciousness, this concern that the world does not pay any attention, or the world will not notice you, or 
you are not able to give an explanation. These people can carry this to the extreme, constantly watching, 
constantly being on the alert in the now. I had one person with the 20.3 who told me, "I don't like what I 
see". There is nothing to do because this is a mechanic. I told him, "If you don't see what you like, also 
see there is nothing you can do about that. Anybody that is here in the now gets to see everything. " It is 
not that this makes life horrible. 

The trial and error in this process is that, while you are watching your own movie, you learn so many 
things because it does not always work. Every time you are trying to watch yourself, your whole self- 
analysis is going to come out of interaction with others. 

We are talking about the 20th gate alone. We are not talking about it being connected. It is always looking 
to the other side, yet it does not know that it is there, so it will always bump into it. When they meet 
somebody who rejects them because they are individual, they watch that in the movie. They take all that 
on themselves. They become uncomfortable. "Why didn't that work? Why was I made so 
uncomfortable?" and that restricts them the next time, or it adds to their experience and they learn to 
recognize who they can be "I am in the now" with. That is part of their learning process. It is a feedback 
process and you don't know it because you are not always connected to the rest of it. 

20.4 Application 

Here in the upper trigram, we are dealing with externalization. We are dealing with this one-track- 
process. We are also dealing with the nature of opportunity and this gate is going to meet the 10.4, the 
potential for awakening. That potential lies in recognizing the right opportunity. 

This line is called Application. Recognition and awareness that can only be transformed into action in 
cooperation with those who have the ability to act upon understanding. This is one of the keys to pure 
individuality. The pure individual says, "I know I can integrate with you only if you can follow my 
knowing. If you cannot understand my explanation, this is not going to work." This is the whole thing 
about the knower. The knower can have a wonderful relationship with those that can grasp the 
explanation of the knowing. This is the nature of what application is about. 

Again, here we have a gate in the throat that is open to all kinds of things and, in and of itself, it is still 
limited. The fourth line knows that there is a 57th gate that has the awareness, so it can say, "I know I am 
now". It knows that the 34th gate is there with its energy so it says, "I know I am doing now." When the 
10th gate is there, it can say, "I know what I am doing for myself now." Built into that mechanic is the 
recognition that all of those forces are there in various combinations, waiting. 

This application has two sides. The Jupiter side: The teacher whose students transcend him/her, and the 
Mercury side: The tendency to prefer theory to application. They are not very different because this is the 
knower that says, "I know but I need you to recognize that knowing and if you do so, it is a value for you. 
I may even give you enough value as a base so that you can transcend me, or that person, as a teacher." 

In the white book: Where the expression of awareness can only be turned into action through others. The 
teacher; or The expression of awareness as theory with little interest in its application. Well, it is not 
important for that knower who does not have his own energy. I know many people with the fourth line 
detriment; they are people who know things in the now and have all kinds of theories that have come out 
of that recognition in the now. But they don't care what anybody does with it. The exalted has the same 
experience, experiencing things in the now, knowing something about that and immediately wanting to be 
able to empower others with that knowledge. Both of these sides of the line are teachers. The exalted 

Page 3C 

teacher always gets exactly the right students, and the detriment teacher gets the students that they know 
can't really grasp it and who will never be able to transcend them. So, they are just happy enough to offer 
the theory. 

20.5 Realism 

The fifth line is called Realism. This is a line of universalization. It is a line that gets projected on, and it 
is a very difficult line. Everybody is projecting on this line that these people know. Everybody is 
projecting on them that they are the ones that know what is really going on in the now. They may or may 
not. 

The first thing that the fifth line of the 20 knows is that Contemplation, in and of itself, is no guarantee of 
success. It is not enough to be existential. If you don't have any power, what will you do with what you 
recognize in the now? If you don't have any awareness, what can you make of it? And if you don't have 
any identity, who are you in the now? These are three other gates that the 20 points towards. The fifth line 
recognizes, because it is deeply aware, that there is the other side. They know that all three of those gates 
are out there and know that being in the now is not enough. You can be in the now. You can stand there 
and say, "Oh, there is a car coming towards me," but if you don't have a motor, you will die. It is not 
going to help you to be conscious of that in the now. It does not help you to be existential if you can't get 
out of the way. 

The fifth line understands the cold, hard reality of what life is and there is nobody else in this life that you 
are going to meet that will point to life and show you all of its beauty and all of its ugliness. That is what 
they see. They see the reality of what things are. This is not necessarily pleasing. 

Saturn exalted. Where concentration on details results in a perfected form. Perfected form is part of the 
whole Integration process. These people recognize after a while that it is not enough to be existential. "I 
have to find out where all these other sources of energy and power and awareness are so that I can access 
them in order to get to the perfected form of survival. " 

Uranus in detriment. Where reality creates dissatisfaction and adds to instability. Uranus stands for 
suddenness and unexpectedness. These are people that walk out of their house in the morning and they 
see everything that is ugly. They see the garbage that was not put in the garbage can. They see the drunk 
that is sitting in the doorway. They see the rust eating away at the bottom of a car. They see what needs to 
be repaired. They see the grayness in people's faces, the coldness in their eyes. They get the whole movie 
with one breath. It is a real gift that these people have. But, unless they are connected to awareness, unless 
they are connected to the motor, unless they are connected to the identity, they are deeply uncomfortable 
with this capacity to see the world as it is. They are not believers. These are not abstract people. They 
don't have any faith. They are not logical people trying to find a pattern and project into the future. They 
just look around and see what they see. 

The success of expressing awareness through detail; or The expression of awareness in the now through 
dissatisfaction with the reality one sees. These people sound like whiners but they are not. They really do 
see what is ugly. For them, that is quite a burden in their life because it is very hard for them unless they 
are integrated to the rest of this Integration system. It is hard for them to see why life is worth surviving. 

20.6 Wisdom 

Like all sixth lines, there is something else that is at work here. This line is called Wisdom. 
Contemplation which results in the ability to apply understanding. That may or may not be the case. 

Page 4  

This is a deeply individual line. Any individual line says, "I am now." I have this line and I have the 
Venus exalted, so I am very fortunate in that. This line does not care about the world and this line can be 
misread that way. I certainly never cared about the world, nor did I ever have the idea for even a fraction 
of a moment that what I was going through in the now could be of value to anybody. This is typical of the 
sixth line. What is there for me to say to the collective if I don't know anything myself? And all knowers 
are like that. They know things and they don't know things and they go through their life. 

This line is about the individual staying with their individual process. There is within it The ability to 
transform individual awareness for general application and understanding. Don't stand in line and wait for 
that. The fact that there is the ability does not mean, like all sixth lines, that that is going to come out, and 
very often that wisdom looks very dumb. 

This is one of the jokes about all of these things because these people are not necessarily going to put that 
energy out on you and take their individual experience and try to turn that into a direction for you. It is 
very difficult for the individual to do that. They have to know; they have to be able to explain it. They 
have to have those that are willing to listen and, ultimately, those that can actualize it before there is any 
certainty in any of that. Venus exalted. The establishment for the benefit of society, values, ideals and 
their patterns, and how they can be understood and applied. 

The Mercury in detriment is not any different. It is the theoretical. The same as above, but motivated by 
the self satisfying mental challenge rather than altruism. These are very individual people living out a 
very individual process. Because there is no such thing as personal karma, these people can be pulled into 
the needs of others and, if they live long enough and their existential process has been broad enough, they 
may be able to make a contribution to the totality. But all sixth lines wait for some kind of force that 
projects that on them. I got that in a very clear way in my confrontation with the Voice. I had to deal with 
something that imposed upon me something that was not there naturally. The mutation was brought to 
me. Otherwise, none of that stuff would have had any value. It is true for all sixth lines. 

I am not saying that you can't experience a sixth line unless you have some kind of science fiction event. 
That is not true. What I'm saying is that there are only very special circumstances in your life that are 
going to bring out the potential of any sixth line. When you have children (that is my concern) that have a 
lot of sixth lines, or they have a Sun/Earth configuration that is in the sixth line, you have to recognize 
that you may never see their potential. You can never allow these children to feel uncomfortable because 
of that. The reality is that they are gifted, but it is up to life whether or not that gift has any real value. 

Wye all have special attributes, but it is a question of what life demands and not what we have. So many 
people are deeply frustrated because what they have they want to push out into the world, but if the world 
is not ready for it and the world doesn't want it, the world will not take it. This is just the way things 
work. All sixth lines, in that sense, are waiting for a sign from the gods, whatever that sign happens to be. 
It does not have to be spiritual or mystical. It can be a car accident. It can be all kinds of things that 
trigger the potential that lies inside all of these sixth lines. 

Page 5C 

HEXAGRAM 21 BITING THROUGH 

We come to a gate that has enormous significance in our lives. It is a gate that often creates a lot of 
problems because it is the only gate that is designed to be a controlling gate. It can only be a controlling 
gate because it has the most powerful ego. 

The fact that it is a controlling gate, the fact that it is a powerful ego is legitimate. In other words, this 
controlling force is necessary in order to be able to serve and protect the tribe. The 21 is here to serve the 
community. It is here to establish for the community what is viable and what works. It is here to make 
sure that the community has what it needs: the food and shelter that it needs and the work that it needs. 

It is here to make sure that there is reward for those efforts, that society not only works but has time for 
leisure. In other words, it is there to look after the needs of humanity living together on the material plane. 
It is the channel of Materialism. Because the 21 is a control gate, it is also very difficult for people and 
often extremely difficult for the 21's themselves. 

Above the lines it says: The justified and necessary use of power in overcoming deliberate and persistent 
interference. 'The justified and necessary use of power...' These are very strong words. You will not hear 
that kind of language in any other gate, '...in overcoming deliberate and persistent interference.' In other 
words, it is not there to overcome unintentional interference. It is not there to overcome interference that 
is not non-persistent. 

But it is there to be in control. It is justified in the use of its power. This is the ego that must strike out. 
That is why it is an ego that is very uncomfortable for those who have it and those who have to 
experience it. 

The way in which a 21 operates has to do with the nature of their design. An undefined heart center with 
the 21 is very different from a defined one. A 21 with a defined heart center is very different as a 
generator, a manifestor or a projector. In other words, there are a lot of complexities in how the gate 
actually can operate. 

If you have the 21 and you are a projector, people in your life have to recognize that you have to be in 
control. Otherwise, you are not meeting the right people. If you are a generator with the 21, you can only 
take control when somebody asks you and you respond to it. If you are a 21 that is a manifestor, you have 
to ask their permission before you control them. If you are a 21 in an undefined heart center, all you can 
do is wait to be offered control because the moment that you claim control, you will break your heart. 

This is where the heart sits. Everybody who has the 21 who is not allowed to exercise their power to be in 
control, those people in their lives who do not allow that are killing them, literally. This is a deeply 
misunderstood hexagram. The 21 has a right to be in control. It has a justified and proper right to be in 
control, but depending on the design, the control will be allowed and will come out in different ways. The 
moment it is there, the 21 has to be trusted and allowed to do its job of serving the community. This is an 
ego that truly will serve the community as long as it is recognized in its power. 

NOTE: The 21 st gate has four different lines that are only singularities now because of the phenomenon 
that Neptune and Pluto are not active in our lifetimes. (Please see the section on Outer Planet Transits in 
the Glossary in Volume 2 copied below.) 

OUTER PLANET TRANSITS 

Detriments and Exaltations Affected by Pluto and Neptune 

Two outer planets, Neptune and Pluto, have cycles that greatly exceed the span of a single human life. 
Neptune's cycle around the wheel requires approximately 165 years and Pluto's cycle is about 284 years. 
Consequently, depending upon the position of these planets in their transit around the wheel, 
periodically, the exalted or the detriment of certain lines that are fixed by these planets may be inactive, 
i.e. not present in the world in the human population. This means that, at any given time, these particular 
aspects of design may or may not be present, genetically in the world and therefore, these qualities are 
not accessible to human beings until the planet re-activates that gate or its harmonic. 

Something to keep in mind, also, is that the period of time that these detriments or exaltations remain 
inactive after there are no people alive carrying these activations will be shortened somewhat by Pluto or 
Neptune's transit to the harmonic gate within the channel. How much shorter is determined by the 
relative positions of the harmonic gates within the wheel. 

For example, gates 25 and 51 that form the channel of Initiation are both positioned in Aries. Pluto has 
not been in Aries, and therefore in either gate 25 or gate 51, since the beginning of the 19th century. 
Thus, there has been no activation of the 25.3 in detriment, the 51.1 exalted or the 51.6 in detriment for a 
very long time, and it will still be a number of years before Pluto re-enters Aries. With Neptune's absence 
from the 25. 1 and Pluto from the 5 neither of the exaltations is active, which means that the whole 
foundation for Initiation during this time has operated through the detriments. 

At the time of this publication, Neptune is transiting Aquarius, having recently moved through the 41st 
gate, activating the Al. 1, Reasonableness, in the exaltation and bringing that genetic material back out 
into the world. Pluto is moving through Sagittarius, finishing its transit through the 5th gate and thereby 
re-activating the qualities of the detriments of Inner Peace and Joy (the 5.2 and the 5.5) within our gene 
pool. These qualities that have been absent genetically for so many years are now being carried by those 
children born under these transits. 

The following is a list of lines currently affected by Pluto or Neptune in which these lines have an aspect 
that is not functioning as of now. When doing readings for clients, when you get to these lines, you can 
only read the one aspect of the line, the exaltation or the detriment, that is still operating. 

3.3 Pluto in detriment. 

3.6 Pluto in detriment. 

21.2 Neptune in detriment. 21.3 Neptune exalted. 21.5 Pluto in detriment. 21.6 Pluto exalted. 22.4 
Neptune exalted. 

24.6 Pluto in detriment. (Pluto goes into 61 in 2010.) 

25.1 Neptune exalted. 

25.3 Pluto in detriment. 30.4 Pluto exalted. 30.5 Pluto exalted 30.3 Pluto exalted. 36.2 Neptune 
exalted. 36.3 Pluto exalted. 36.4 Pluto exalted. 

36.5 Pluto exalted. 

41.6 Pluto in detriment. 

49.2 Pluto in detriment. 49.3 Neptune exalted. 49.6 Neptune exalted. 
51.1 Pluto exalted. 

51.6 Pluto in detriment. 

61.6 Pluto exalted. (Pluto will get there in the next 8 years.) 

21.1 Warning 

All first lines speak for the nature of the hexagram. Warning is the basis of the 21 and its control. "Don't 
interferel Attention." The use of force as a last resort. In other words, in the use of power to be in control, 
the worst thing is to start with force first. I learned this many years ago as a teacher. In public teaching 
institutions, there were always those teachers who can never, ever control their students. They will 
threaten them. When that does not work, they will use force and the moment you use force, you cannot go 
any further. The moment that I had a teacher that would strap and punish me, I knew that I had taken 
them to their limitation. What else could they do? Kill me? 

Warning. The use of force as a last resort. It does not say that you don't use force. If you keep on saying, 
"Hey, look, this is what you have to do," and they still do not listen, then you can use force. 

Mars exalted. The fierceness to be respected without recourse to action. This is an overview line. It takes 
a long time to get that respect. It is not that you have it right away. This is a deeply painful gate to have if 
you are a child. You are here to be in control but you are being dictated by your parents, your school, by 
your siblings, by friends. What usually happens is that these people live with nothing but tension. The 
cross of Tension is rooted in the polarity between the 21 and the 48. The 21st gate can bring an enormous 
tension which becomes a strain on the heart, simply because these people are not allowed to be in control. 

The Moon in detriment. An inherent peacefulness that all too often turns a necessary warning into a plea. 
In the white book: The willpower and ego to ensure respect; or A lack of willpower that is forced to ask 
for respect. These are the 21 's who say, "Look, please let me be in control. I know what I am doing. 
Please stop interfering. Please." That is not a very powerful way of dealing with things. In that moment, 
the 21 is asking for the other not to interfere when, in fact, they are here to insist that there is no 
interference. 

This is the great dilemma of the 21. That dilemma is written in the genetic continuity of the chart. The 21 
in an undefined heart center is dependent on the other person as to whether they can bring out their 
control or not and they may have to ask. When it is defined to the throat, it is a different process but 
always, the dilemma for the 21 is to find a way to get the respect so that they are not interfered with. They 
cannot get that until they learn how to control things. If you have a child with the 21, give them 
responsibilities. Give them things that they control (their schedule or whatever) so they learn what it is to 
be in control and they get respect for their ability to be in control of things. 

21.2 Might is right 

The second line is called Might is right and it has Neptune in detriment, which means that this side is not 
operating in our time. 

It is an overview line: The legitimacy of action in response to flagrant and persistent interference. 
Remember, to be in control means that you don't deal with any kind of interference because it will show 
that you are not really in control. This is the ego, after all. You release that control when you are 
constantly being interfered with; that is the moment that you have to stop the interference. 

Think about the second line, which does not know any of that. It does not even realize that it is being in 
control. Because it does not have that realization (lower trigram, not transpersonal), it is simply in its own 
thing and then somebody comes along and, because they can look in the window, they say, "These people 
are being in control of that. I will interfere with that." Boy, do they get a surprise! 

What comes out immediately is Mars exalted; there is no detriment. Powerful and extreme reaction. Here, 
the severest action will be the most successful. You see somebody sitting at a desk and they are doing 
something. They are in control of what they are doing and somebody comes up to them and says, "You 
really shouldn't." The legitimate rejection of interference on the material plane. This can be very shocking 
to people. 

21.3 Powerlessness 

The third line is a line that is often totally misunderstood and misinterpreted. Whenever I meet 21.3's, I do 
the best I can to correct them immediately about the nature of what this line is. Because of the keynote, 
Powerlessness, there is a false assumption connected to this. This is not about being without power. This 
is about the possibility of being powerless. 

An overview line, trial and error: Where the just are condemned to a futile confrontation with superior 
forces. This is the way logic works: if you break down what this sentence is actually saying, it says that 
the just are condemned to a futile confrontation with superior forces, not with inferior forces. When 
somebody has the 21.3, they can never ever work for somebody else. It is hard for 21's to work for 
anybody else anyway and I always tell 21's the same thing: you have to be your own boss and if that 
means that you have to work in a corporation, then you have a separate contract which states that you are 
an outsider that is contracted in so you can be in control of your material life and not be dependent. 

What happens to these people in their trial and error process is that, for example, they try to get into a 
corporation and they get in at a lower level. These 21.3's go through hell with that because every step and 
layer above them, every layer of management and control that is above them, is absolutely infuriating to 
them because they can't win. They don't have the juice. They can't win. They are powerless. The moment 
that you give a 21.3 a boss, they are powerless. This leads to a lot of difficulties. 

There is an advantage to that. The Neptunian field is not at work. The advantage is because this exalted is 
Defeat as a survivable humiliation, often acceptable through the abuse of drugs and alcohol. This is not 
active, what is active is: Total withdrawal. Think about what that means in our society. 

In the white book you can see that it is: A lack of will for the material path in order to protect the ego. 
These are people that do not want to work, do not want to leave school. These are people that do not want 
to have a boss, that want to reject the whole material plane because, in their life, it is impossible to have 
somebody controlling them and telling them what to do. So, when you meet a 21.3 and you are dealing 
with this energy, you must tell them that there is only one thing that can help them: never, ever have a 
boss. 

Again, the dilemma of being an ego-child: ego children, like emotional children, have enormous problems 
in their early years because they have to deal with authority. Particularly, 21 children constantly have to 
deal with authority. A 21.3 child can be made to feel like they have no power at all and that futility can be 
a deep pain in their life and they will just withdraw. They will just hide so that they do not have to listen 
to somebody controlling them. 

It is very important to recognize that 21 children have to be treated with respect. They have to. They have 
to be given their opportunity to show that they are capable of being in control even when they are very 
young, however you work that out because, otherwise, this powerlessness is conditioning them from the 
very start and they never get to flower at all. 

So many 21.3's that I meet are so angry at the world, so uncomfortable with having been directed all of 
their lives. For them it is so easy: do not have a boss. Do not have a boss in your relationships; do not 

have a boss at work. Do not have a superior force in your life, unless you are a masochist and you love to 
be powerless. By the way, the punks came with this genetic theme. 

Regarding their approach to the material plane: this line does not mean that the 21.3 has to withdraw. 
Remember the overview of the line which says that the futile confrontation is only with superior forces. 
There is no need to withdraw if they are not dealing with superior forces. The moment they go out and try 
to deal with superior forces, automatically, all 21.3's will withdraw. They will have a very hard time on 
the material plane. 

The advantage we can give them in letting them know what that line means for them is to understand that 
if they give up trying to work for somebody (again that takes ego courage), then that withdrawal is not 
active for them. It will only be active if they meet a superior force because then they will be in a futile 
position. 

21.4 Strategy 

When you come to the upper trigram, particularly in the 21st gate, you are dealing with something very 
different: the capacity to bring control to the transpersonal experience. The fourth and fifth lines are 
extremely well equipped in the 21 to be able to control what they have to control, which is manifestation. 
Everything about the tribe is desperate to get to the throat. For the tribe, there is only one way: the 21/45. 
The throat itself is dependent on having that ego do the work, do the serving. The only way the throat gets 
that is by protecting the 21.21's seek out their protectors because they need to find access to 
manifestation, and that is their gift. Their gift is that they have the ability to transpersonally see how to get 
things manifested. 21.4's and 21.5's make very powerful leaders, good presidents of companies. The 
fourth line is called Strategy. 

Overview line: Careful appraisal of opposing forces to establish a proper response. This is not simply 
recognizing that one has the capacity to be in control and the ego that says, "I have to be in control." This 
is an ego that says, "Wait a second. How do I exercise my control?" In other words, this is an aspect that 
works the strategy for getting to manifestation. You have to control some people tightly if you are a 21. 
Some others have to be given space. It varies. The question of what kind of control to use, who to control 
and when to control, becomes a transpersonal strategy. 

We have Jupiter exalted. Success in action through clarity, which means control as the result of 
investigation: looking at things and seeing how they can be done. But remember, this is a one-tracked 
process, so strategy is everything. These are very strategic people and they are often accused of being 
deeply manipulative because they know how to control. Because they are in control-positions, people 
rarely accuse them of that because they tend to be dependent on their manipulation to have what they 
need in this life. 

Earth in detriment. A tendency, when in the right, to misjudge the power of one's opponents. This is 
always a dilemma for the ego: just because it is right does not mean that it is going to work. Here in the 
fourth line, just because you have the right strategy does not mean that it is going to work. There are a lot 
of businesses everywhere in the world that design strategies every year of how they will make millions. 
Yes, strategies are nice, but they do not always work. 

In the white book: The ego to succeed on the material plane and the instinct to use willpower effectively 
in response to conditions. This is the gift of being able to see where you use your control. The Earth 
detriment. The drive when in the right to follow one's ego rather than one's instincts. This is the ego 
saying, "This is my strategy. I made it up and I will not give it up. It will work," even though you know 
that it will crash. 

The 'opposing forces' are forces which interfere. In this line, it does not matter whether they are inferior or 
superior. Only the third line is particularly about superior forces. The third line is the pathway that leads 
to wisdom. For any 2 1, the third line is really saying: look, if you really understand that you do not have 
to be powerless, you become the superior force. That is where the real wisdom of the 21 lies, when it 
recognizes that it is the superior force. The moment a 21 recognizes this, it does not have to claim it 
anymore. It will get the natural respect that is due because it does recognize that it is the superior force. 

21.5 Objectivity 

This is a classic fifth line and even more so because of the impact of not having Pluto being active, so 
there is no detriment in this particular line in our time. All fifth lines get projected on. They get projected 
on because that projection is the desire, the need of passion of the totality to have that kind of a role 
displayed out of that hexagram. So, society as a whole is looking to the 21.5 and saying, "They should be 
in control." It is projected on them positively and negatively that they should be in control. Obviously, 
like any fifth line, they can take that opportunity. If someone projects on you that you are in control, if 
you take control and the result is positive, then control is given to you and you get the respect that is due. 

Here we have an overview line. The use of force must be based on impartiality and not emotionally 
motivated. When you read a line that says it must be impartial and not based on emotions, you know that, 
in the learning process, it is very much partial and very much emotional until it finally learns how to use 
power properly. Remember, it is an ongoing process. 

I have a very powerful ego and it is the only motor in my design, so I manifest out of the power of the 
ego. The one thing that I know about the ego is its inherent immaturity. The ego takes a very long time to 
grow up because the rest of what it meets in the world is trying to reduce its power rather than to nurture 
it. 

The whole thing about the nature of this fifth line is that objectivity is what the totality wants from its 
controllers. They want its controllers to be impartial. They don't want them to be motivated by 
relationships or because they owe somebody something. They want to make sure that it is not emotional. 
Just because somebody does not like you for what you did does not mean that they will throw you out 
when, in fact, you may be of value and may be doing your work. We want our controlling agents to be 
impartial and non-emotional. 

As a learning curve, the fifth line will be both partially prejudiced and emotional and it learns by the price 
it pays. The moment that it is not objective in its control, it will create all kinds of resistance from other 
forces. "I will not let you control me because you do not control fairly. You don't control Johnny as much 
as you control me." They lose the respect that way and, in order for them to gain that back, it iss an 
objective process that has to be at work. 

Here you have Jupiter exalted. A principled and legal character that ensures objectivity. Those principles 
have to come by. One has to learn how to use power. Because power does not belong to us, it is 
something you have to learn to work with, to learn how to use. 

In the white book: The balanced ego... (But it will start off imbalanced, please understand that.l ...whose 
willpower is applied objectively. We very much need these people in the world and, because this is a time 
that we do not have Pluto (here, we have a whole generation, day by day, year by year for many years 
now, that is coming into the world with the possibility of being purely objective, as our controlling 
agents. *The whole world is controlled by 21's. That is part olf the global vibrdtion.'llhat is part of the role 
of the 21. Let's do our best-to nurture the 211.5s. If you project onto the 21.5 child that It has to be in 

control, make sure that you teach that dhild the in' portance -of being impartial and nonersotional in its 
control, in its use of power, because ultimately, these are the beings that are going to apply those controls 
to the rest of the world. 

When you think about it, all the 110th gates together condition our behavior iim'the'world. All the 2nd 
gates together condition our direction in the world. All the 21st gates condition whether or not our 
societies-and cultures are going to operate properly. It is essential for us that we learn to recognize these 
qualities in our children and to see very dearly that 21 children must be nurtured so that they end up being 
productive controlling agents rather than embittered ones, rather than being forced to withdraw, their egos 
shattered, feeling inferior and not wanting to be involved in controlling. If all the 21's give up being in 
control, we are going to have what the sixth line predicts: nothing but chaos. 

21.6 Chaos 

The thing to recognize about the nature of the materialism that is inherent in the 21 is that, built into the 
most materialistic channel is also anti-materialism, which we already met in the third line: the 
powerlessness that becomes a lack of will for the material plane because of the ego. That manifests 
differently. For example, people saying that money is bad, that everybody should share. A good hippie 
consciousness can come out of the 21.3. The same thing is true for the sixth line. Because sixth lines, in 
and of themselves, are transitional, they are going to sit above in their aloofness and look out on things. A 
21.6 is not very likely to be material and, when they are young, they get involved with it and they 
discover that it can be disastrous for them. 

Chaos. Where ineffective action leads to disorder. The moment that you see a line like that and you are 
dealing with a sixth line, you really know that this line is going to spend most of its life judging whether 
something could be an effective action or not. "Well, I don't know if I should really take control because I 
don't know if it is really going to work and I don't know if I'll really get what I want to get and I don't 
know whether I will be interfered with and I'll have all these problems." They learn that very early 
because a 21.6 is like a bull in a china shop. They will go in there and, all of a sudden, everything is 
flying and they never go into that shop again after that. "Why should I go in there? If I do the wrong 
thing, everything is going to explode." 

The other thing about this line is that the Pluto exalted is not there, so you are dealing with only the 
Venus in detriment. Withdrawal and reliance on inner order in a chaotic situation. This is the greatest 
fence sitter of all the sixth lines. The 21.6 sits there on that fence and it does not want to do anything else 
other than sitting on that fence because it knows that if it steps off that fence, the possibility is that 
nothing will result of it but chaos. 

In the white book: Where the material direction is chaotic, the ego will withdraw and use its power to find 
an inner order. But the moment a 21.6 knows what material path is for it and is in control of that material 
path, you have somebody who can be an enormous success. Sixth lines have this inherent capacity to be 
wise and fulfilled. It is like the 59.6 who will have a lot of quick relationships when it is young and then 
give up; but if it finds the right relationship, it will display a quality of intimacy that we call soul mate, 
that can be absolutely beautiful and it will spend day after day with its partner for the rest of its life. In 
other words, there is the potential in the sixth line for quite a transition experience, something that is 
really beyond the capacity of the hexagram. However, this is not a very good age for that because the 21.6 
goes to the 51.1. 

The reality is that the 21 and the 51 are next to each other, so that you have these two very expressive 
gates of the ego system: one going the material way and one going the initiative and potentially mystical 
way. When the 21.6 is sitting at its point on its roof and it is staring out, it stares into the 5 which does not 

have the Pluto exalted. It stares into the 5 in which withdrawal is something that is absolutely necessary 
after a shock. So the reality is that this sixth line, which is rooted in withdrawal, is looking for an inner 
order that is compounded by the fact that it is moving towards withdrawal. In other words, one of the 
things that happens to a 21.6 in our time is that they want to be 51 's. Instead of the 21.6 ending up 
pursuing the material path, they are going to look for the spiritual way and are trying to find wealth in 
another way. Many of them end up being spiritual business people and end up making their living by 
selling inner order. That is always a possibility for them. 

But it is a very long process for the 21.6 to find their way. It is going to take time in their life before 
something is really of value to them to be in control of because the thing for them is that it has to be able 
to come out in the action. If it can't, it is not worth doing. 

The actions have to be correct; otherwise there is nothing but chaos. The actions can only be correct if the 
material path is correct. The 21.6 is not just looking to be in control, it has to be in control of the right 
thing. The fact that it looks inward is actually an advantage because, from its point of view, it is there to 
control. If they stay long enough and they watch the movie, they might find the material direction that is 
correct for them. When chaos happens, the direction was not correct. The inner order was not right. The 
actions were ineffective. 

HEXAGRAM 22 GRACE 

The channel of Openness, the design of a social or an anti-social being, and the 22nd gate, the gate of 
Grace. In English, there is a nice play on this: the gate of grace and the gate of disgrace. It can be both, 
depending on the nature of the wave. 

This channel is deeply mutative. It is only out of this channel that mutation can actually spread. It gives 
this channel an unusual quality. All mutation moves out into the general population through the 12/22. 
The 12th gate has already been responsible for the mutation in our larynx which allows us to articulate 
through language. The 55th gate will be the mutation that takes place to allow the nature of the spirit to 
come out, and the pressure is on the 22 to recognize when to be socially open to release the mutation. 

This is the great gift of the 22, to know exactly when to release the mutation. If it doesn't, there is disgrace 
because it does not work. Timing is in the nature of the moods. The 22nd gate: the gate of openness, the 
possibility to provoke social openness or not. They can provoke it. 

Remember the nature of the 39 that teases the 55. They can be deeply anti-social in the same way that the 
55th gate can not only show the highest level of emotion, it can be absolutely icy cold in not releasing any 
emotion whatsoever. The awareness possibility is the openness to eating. 

One of the things that are very good for individuals is to speak to people while they are eating. This is 
something I learned a long time ago as a teacher. I spent about ten years of my life teaching in formal 
institutions at many different levels. I was always in institutions that enforced the no-eating process, for 
decor, I assume. But students were not allowed to eat, other than when I was teaching in university. In the 
early 1980's, I ran an experimental school in Ibiza. I took children who were having a hard time and that, 
according to authorities, were not traditionally educational. I brought them together and taught them the 
history of the universe in four months. I loaded them up with all kinds of information, just as memory 
techniques. After one hour with me, they were hungry. 

This is one of the things to recognize about the nature of the mind: the moment that you are truly using 
your mind, if you are not getting hungry, there is something wrong because you are using an enormous 
amount of energy. One of the things that kept my students brimming was that I allowed them to sit there 
and stuff their face the whole time that I was teaching them. It maintained their energy. The brain will 
deplete your energy very quickly and it is a very important thing to be able to eat while you are doing 
your most powerful thinking process. Speaking to people while they are eating is very good for 
individuals. It is the timing of those things. 

There is a funny thing in the nature of lines that I thought about for many years. One of them is the 
relationship between the 15 and the 22. The 15 is the love of humanity and it is the gate of extremism. It 
is called Modesty. Then you come over here to Grace and, at its best, Grace is the most modest of all 
gates as an incredible strategy. It truly deserves the name 'Modesty'. 'Grace' could be handed over to the 
15th gate quite easily. 

Everything about the individual is demanding attention. The nature of the individual process is trying to 
get the attention of others. The 22nd gate has a special capability. It is not the 12th gate, nor the 55th gate 
with its magic and mutation. It always has to take a backseat to the power of those two gates because the 
individual is always at risk in the larger society. The nature of 22nd gate in romance, when we look at it 
sexually, is the power to be attentive, to be open to listening. 

Listening is so important in romance: the capacity to hear out each other. The 22nd gate carries with it the 
power to empower attentiveness in others. This is its grace. 

When the 22nd gate is with others, it empowers them to be attentive; it empowers them to listen. This is 
important. In doing that, it has to wait to hear them out first before it will get its chance to speak. It is 
designed to be second and then it can bring out its response in its wave. The moment that the 22nd gate 
tries to be the gun-slinger instead of being the polite one, it fails. When you watch a 22 drive, they always 
allow others to go first, to get into the lane. This is their attentiveness. This is part of their power. 

22.1 Second class ticket 

The essence, the foundation of the hexagram. Moon exalted. The ability to accept and enjoy a subordinate 
position. If there is no attentiveness, there is no mutation. There is no awakening of the human spirit out 
of the 55, unless the 22 is willing to be the one that empowers the attentiveness. The stranger going out 
into the world without the attentiveness, the mutation cannot take place because there is nobody to listen. 
Mars in detriment. The inevitable humiliation that comes with claiming a first class seat with a second 
class ticket. I have met these people who have done exactly the same thing. They are always caught 
because that is not their job. The moment that they try to go ahead at the light instead of letting the other 
person come, they instantly have an accident. 

In the Book of Letters: The emotional awareness to enjoy a subordinate position; or Where the emotional 
energy challenges the awareness and can result in social humiliation. This is such a key for 22's. Without 
them, there is no public platform for mutation and yet their role is that, so often, they are not the ones that 
get any credit. 

22.2 Charm school 

The second lines rarely, if ever, deliver any kind of mutation. The nature of Charm school is that there is 
the ability to empower attentiveness through style. These people have a very powerful social mechanic: 
they have the capacity to get other people to be attentive but, at the moment that their turn comes, they do 
not have a lot to say. They have a social style but they do not necessarily have a mutation that they are 
being able to contribute. Remember that this is projection and not introspection. 

The belief that style can mask nature. Sun exalted. The ability to successfully delude oneself and others. 
There is the sense of generating the attentiveness of others and, when their turn comes, they can be quite 
confused because there does not seem to be a great deal behind that mask. It is a social skill. These people 
are very good when that social skill is about their work. This is very handy to have on the material plane. 
They are very good at socializing at the stranger level, easily being able to make contact, but the moment 
that it gets more serious, the moment that it would involve a mutation, bringing something as a 
contribution, that is where the dilemma begins. Their value is that they can bring about the attentiveness 
so easily that they can create the social opportunities. 

Jupiter in detriment. The legalization of form over substance. The charm school people with the detriment 
are the ones who know that it is all style. They can take advantage of that. The value of that is to be able 
to have a social situation in which you can offer something to get your individual process out. 

The possibility to attract others with an emotional style; or Where the style is energized at the expense of 
awareness. The style becomes everything. These are people that can really get your attention. They are 
walking on the street and you see them and you say, "Wow, that is really something." Then again, you 
may not be crazy about talking to them. That is another story. 

22.3 The Enchanter 

The 22.3 is one of those attributes that people write and sing about. It is an emotional type that, through 
the 12th gate, gets written about in love stories and poetry and songs. The third line is about adaptation 
and it is about bonds made and broken. It is about allegiance and rejection. 

This line is called The Enchanter. This is the capacity of Perfected grace, or openness. That perfected 
openness is simply a genetic gift and it is not something that is anything other than self-involved. It is 
individual. That openness is there and it is perfect, but it does not stay. This is just something that keeps 
moving along. People are always confused by this because they think that that openness is something 
tribal. They think that it is an intimacy. It seems like an intimacy; it feels like an intimacy, but it is not. It 
is just this perfected openness, this perfected social grace. 

Saturn exalted. Form as a definition and actualization of substance. It is in the form: that is the Saturnian 
nature of it. It is really in the form. It is not something that is constructed. It is not something that is 
learned. It is right there, deep in the form itself, in every movement of that. These are people that, when 
you see them, you know that you have access to them, and that they will be open. That quality is there. It 
just won't stay there. You can't hold on to it. 

Mars in detriment. Unconscious grace. In the Book of Letters, we have: The possibility for perfected 
openness through the alignment of emotional energy and awareness; and An innate openness, on the 
Martian side. It is simply just there. The thing to recognize about this is that they will never allow a 
romance to be consummated. This is the whole thing about the nature of this - they give you this sense 
that there is some place to go with them and there is not. They are there to empower you at the most 
attentive level. You are really there for them and then they are gone. 

22.4 Sensitivity 

When you get to the fourth line, you get to the line of externalization and you get to this fixedness, to this 
onepointedness, to the one-trackedness. We come to Sensitivity. Remember that the nature of the fourth 
line is that it is always ready to look to the other side; in this case, looking to the 12. Again, particularly in 
this case, this is one of the three social channels, so it is deeply social and deeply concerned about what is 
on the other side. 

The modification of behavior to enrich interactions. The fixedness is: how do I modify my behavior? 
They are very concerned about their behavior, often at the expense of getting the mutation out. They are 
just concerned about what the behavior should be. 

Neptune exalted. Neptune in this position already tells you that it will be tough. A mediumistic simplicity 
that rejects elaborate rituals. This is one side of the behavioral process and the mediumistic quality, the 
mood quality. The whole thing about the mood process is that the moment that you recognize the nature 
of moods, you begin to recognize that you can identify moods of others through their tone. All of this is 
very acoustic. This mediumistic simplicity is simply to catch the vibration and know whether it is the 
right moment to create this individual process where you are going to try to bring about something that is 
new, where you try to bring out your mutation. 

Mars in detriment. An over-reliance on the mechanics of style that can abort potentially significant 
relationships. They are so concerned about the behavior in the interaction, to be graceful, until finally 
waiting for your moment to release that mutation. 

In the Book of Letters, the exalted: The possibility of social openness through the rejection of formality. 
Remember, this individual and its nature here is looking for the behavior that says, "This is really me. I 
am individual. I don't have to do it the formal way." 

On the other side: The limitation of social openness through the need for formality. The moment that you 
get into the formalities, you are limited in what kind of contact you are actually going to have. 

This is the only moral dilemma of the individual. If you look throughout all the individuality, keynoted by 
the 23.3: amorality that lies within the individual process, this is the moral bone for the individual: "If 
they are not paying attention to me, something is wrong." In the contact to the other, they have all their 
rights and wrongs. How do you deal with a stranger? How do you deal with the collective or the tribe? 
They have all their rights and wrongs. This is where their morality lies: how they are supposed to deal 
with the other. They get very fixed on that. The only way is to be informal; for example, executives that 
run around and tell everybody to strip off their ties. 

22.5 Directness 

The fifth line is a line of universalization, particularly in this case because this is a stream in which so 
much mutation takes place. The universalization that is possible through the fifth line here is very 
significant. This fifth line carries with it the mantra I give to everyone who is individual, particularly in 
this stream. "Don't do anything unless you are in the mood." This is the great mood line and the moment 
that it is recognized for what it is, that is where its perfection lies. 

It is called Directness. The disregard of form when required. 'Required' means if I am in the mood. If I am 
in the! mood,, it is okay. If not; it is not okay. Jupiter exalted. The power inherent in higher principals to 
successfully transgress behavioral codes., If I am not in the mood, I will not do it. 

This one of my favorite stories: Jurgen and I, this year in the spring, were both very illl amd had traveled 
from Amsterdam vial southern Germamy to Vienna to a very cold, wet place near the Hungarian border. 
VVred arrived a day late and there were people silting in the mill, waiting for us to- arrive. We finally get 
there. We have lunch and afterwards, we want to start the course. I can feel everybody's energy: they are 
waiting and I start setting everything up, when Jurgen walks iin and says, "I am not in the mood, so I cant 
do it." I know his design. He is a 12.5/22.5 which means that when he! is not in the mood, he. can't do, it. 
It takes a lot of courage to say that. Ji rgen stayed in bed and Henrietta did the whole course and 
everything was fine. People are always afraid to honor their true nature.. If you do not do so, you can 
mever (live with yourself and you bring alll kinds of problems into other people's lives. 

The integrity of this line is living by the nature of its moods. Only in honoring its moods does it honor the 
deep potential that lies in that: to be graceful. Otherwise, they really are disgraceful. They disgrace 
themselves and can create very embarrassing situations, such as Mars in detriment: A tendency to create 
embarrassing situations, and though invariably successful, the often resulting reputation for crudity and 
impudence. 

In the white book: The possibility through emotional awareness to behave individualistically in social 
interaction. To behave individualistically is to honor your moods. 

The possibility that individual behavior in social interaction will generate negative projections from 
others. So often I get invited some place and, the moment I am there, my mood says, "Go." So I walk out. 
If I don't live with myself, I have a problem. I follow the nature of what my moods tell me. I have the 
12th gate. If I step into an emotional field that I don't like, I immediately know to leave. When I walk out, 
I know what they say behind me. I have been called everything. 

22.6 Maturity 

One of the great jokes about this is that the next line is the 36.1. We go back to the deep need for an 
experience; in other words, not to have a second class ticket, to go beyond that to actually experience 
something different. This line is called Maturity. The alignment with experience of form with substance. 

Sun exalted. Natural and evident leadership and authority. It is through this sixth line that we will live out 
a new social mutation. Think about that. Spirit awareness is something that will be the most social thing. 
We can't even imagine now how social that is. This is an entirely new social horizon that will come into 
view for us. The leadership for that lies with the 22 because it is about attentiveness, paying attention to 
the other in a very deep way. Paying attention to the spirit of the other, ultimately, is its possibility and the 
leadership comes out of that. 

Mars in detriment. The alignment tends to express itself in nonconformist modes. Something very 
different can come out of this line, something very new. The 12.6 is called Metamorphosis. Only two 
gates in the whole wheel have such a name; the other gate is the 62.5. In the stream from the 39.6 to the 
12.6, there is a deep metamorphic process. 

In the Book of Letters: The possibility that experience in social interaction will result in a leadership 
capacity. These people really know the social environment, but again, their concern is far beyond that. 
Their concern is the establishment of mutation that they would love to see experienced (their movement 
to the 36): will this mutation bring crisis? What kind of change will it bring? It tries to see what it is going 
to be like. Remember that the individual brings mutation, but only the collective judges it. The individual 
does not. In this context, it is looking for that experience to see what it will be like. Not an experiment; it 
is not something logical that is about to happen. 

Please take this as a deeply mystical clue. Spirit awareness is not logical any more than emotions are 
logical. We can describe it logically through Human Design, but we are describing the mechanic and not 
the emotion. The spirit is not something that will be logical. That is one of the keys to recognize. 

The possibility that experience in social interaction will result in a non-conformist expression of 
openness. This non-conformist expression of openness is a window to the possibilities of the emotional 
spirit. Now, these people can be easily depressed by not being able to see the mutation and the nature of it 
alive. These people know; whether it is through breathing or singing or meditating, they have had a 
glimpse within them in their capacity to be attentive. They can be so attentive that they can almost listen 
to the neutrino stream. 

HEXAGRAM 23 SPLITTING APART 

There is a difference between the collective process in the throat, with its primary gates of 
communication, and the individual process. The collective process in the throat is the capacity to be able 
to translate the internal image or concept from the mind into language, into words: to get people in the 
abstract process to be able to see and make sense out of what you are telling them, or in the logical 
process to get people to recognize and understand the facts. 

When we come to the individual process, it operates differently because the individual mind is acoustic. 
Whenever you see individuality in a chart, what you are looking at is an aspect that operates at an acoustic 
level. So, rather than trying to translate an image and turn it into language so that you can get people to 
see what you are talking about, the 23rd gate acts as a legitimate translator, very much like what Jurgen 
does when he translates me. That is, you take the original inner sound, the inner voice, and find a way to 
translate that into a language that allows the individual to explain themselves. 

The channel 43/23, the channel of Structuring, is a design of individuality subtitled: 'from genius to freak.' 
The individual is always on the outside until they find a way to be able to explain themselves. Unless the 
individual can explain themselves, they are always going to be placed on the outside. The 23rd gate does 
not say, "I believe," like the abstract voice. It does not say, "I think," like the logical voice. It says, "I 
know," or "I don't know." When you say, "I know," you had better be able to explain yourself; if you 
can't, you will be rejected. 

Above the lines it says, Amorality. It is one of the things to recognize about the nature of the individual 
process that, contrary to the collective and the tribal processes, which are both moralistic, the individual 
process is not. Amorality is the key to the individual process. It is not about what is right or wrong. It is 
about what one knows or does not know. 

The awareness and understanding that leads to the acceptance of diversity. The difficulty with all 
individuality is that it seeks to be accepted. It will always attract attention. Because the individual is 
different and brings the potential for a mutative force, the individual can be easily rejected. When the 
individual becomes moralistic, they are the first to be rejected. The reality is that individuals are simply 
different. It is not about whether it is good or bad. 

23.1 Proselytization 

The first line of any hexagram describes the foundation. This is the introspective quality; this is the pure 
nature of a hexagram. The first line of the 23rd hexagram is called Proselytization. The attempt to 
undermine one set of values for another. This word describes a process in which you try to convince other 
people of what you know. 

Jupiter exalted. The sage who, in the extreme, can defend evil as a part of the greater good. Venus in 
detriment. The missionary whose very light will bring darkness. These are the two sides of the individual 
process. It is about bringing mutation. The 23rd hexagram is bringing the possibility of mutation as a 
description of a mental concept. For example: 

I am a pure individual. I have am individual mind. I bring the knowing that I have and do the-very best I 
canto explain iit. The reality its that that either leads to a mutative way in which we think or I will be 
rejected as a freak. These are the two sides of the same coin. 

The powerful expression of an insight which will undermine established values. The Human Design 
System undermines a great deal of dogma. On the other side: The powerful expression of an insight which 

wig produce negative effects. Something that can be mutative can be mutative in a positive or in a 
negative way. Thcit iis, this very mutafive force cam seem very offensive. If you are a black native in the 
heart df Africa and you have a white missionary coming to you and telling you, -NI know that Jesus will 
save you," this cam be ireal pain in the neck, even if the white person is really convinced that he/she does 
a very good job of explaining that. One person's knowing cam be very offensive to the collective or-to - 
the tribe. So, bath sides of these realities dlwnays exist in the 23, which means ilhatthe 23, when it opens 
its mouth and says, "I know," is always open to refection. This is the-other side of the coin. 

23.2 Self-defense 

When you are dealing with the first line, because you are dealing with a voice that says, "I'know," and 
explains itself, the first line recognizes that there is knowing within it, but it is looking into the nature of 
the knowing. When you get to the second line, you are always getting to a line of projection. We know 
that the second line is going to project out the quality of the gate. The second line is always the child in 
the classroom that goes, "I know," and that does not mean they do. 

The whole thing about the nature of the individual is that every aspect of individuality that you find in a 
chart, that aspect has a built-in resistance to interference. This is one of the keys to individual integrity. 
The key is: fall on your own face and do not take anybody else's advice. The reality is that when you have 
a child with the 23.2 that is four years old and is yelling at their parents, "I know," it can get them into a 
lot of trouble because they may not really know. They do not have the ability to look inward the way the 
first line does. They project this knowing out. 

This line is called Self-defense. This is the key to the defense of the individual and it will get its full 
quality when it resonates to the fifth line where the individual process can be universalized. It says: The 
need to abandon tolerance when survival is threatened. Survival is a very powerful word and it is talking 
about the nature of what it is to be an individual. If you are an individual and you know something and 
you swallow that in the face of the resistance from others, your survival as an individual comes to an end. 
That is, your capacity to maintain your individual nature deteriorates, and so many people who have the 
23rd gate never express their "I know" because they were slapped down when they were children. They 
were constantly being put in their place and being told, "You don't know." 

Jupiter exalted. The principle of preservation at its most acute. "I know, I know, I know," and they keep 
screaming it at the Moon in detriment: Where Jupiter will strike out to preserve its integrity, the Moon is 
often satisfied with just protecting itself by fending off hostility. This is the beginning of the individual 
deteriorating. The moment the individual is concerned about harmony is the moment that deterioration 
comes into their individuality. This is very difficult for people who have a lot of individual definition in 
their design because it is very hard for them, genetically speaking, to be able to accept the input from 
others. Yet, built into this, like all the dualities and the polarities in Design, is an inherent weakness 
within the individual: the fear of being rejected, the fear that their contribution to the totality cannot be 
made. 

In the white book it says: The abandonment of tolerance when individual expression is threatened. These 
are people that insist on getting out their "I know," on projecting that knowing out. 

On the other hand: The defense of individual expression in the face of hostility. This is the moment 
where, for example, in the process of a child who has a knowing inside of them, because they have been 
told in the past that they don't know, rather than saying what they do know, they are more concerned in 
keeping everybody happy around them. "I don't want to be treated like a freak so I'd better not tell them 
what I know." 

You notice, by the way, that when I make these references in how this is lived out, I am very often 
referring to children. It is very important to understand that, by the time you get to be an adult, you are 
already so deeply conditioned so far away from your nature. The reality is that this kind of knowledge, 
ultimately, is for children so that their process can be healthy and so the people that raise these children 
can have a deep recognition of the nature of what is there. 

Collective children do not have the same kind of difficulties in dealing with criticism because they are 
born to be critical themselves and they are born to share the nature of criticism. This is part of the process 
of being collective, through experience and experimentation. The tribal child has a contact with those 
around him that is very deep and supportive even when it is difficult because there is a much deeper bond 
in the relationship. But when you are dealing with an individual child or aspects of individuality in a 
child, because they are different and they do not function in those ways, they are deeply sensitive to 
criticism. The criticism at the child's level in the individual child is something that will inhibit their 
capacity and their security to be able to express their individuality. 

23.3 Individuality 

When you come to this third line, it is called Individuality. It is the nature of the individual process. It is, 
in this sense, the archetype of the individual process, that the individual knower cannot really be of value, 
cannot really bring wisdom, unless that knower makes a lot of mistakes. All third lines are about 
adaptation. Knowing can be a very fixed process and the reality is that the knower who goes through a 
mistake process and comes to grips with that process of trial and error and adaptation, that the nature of 
their individuality, the power of their ability to explain themselves, grows. 

Whenever I deal with individuals, I always remind them that it is very important for them to develop 
language skills. It is very important for them to develop the capability of being able to explain themselves 
because, if you can't explain yourself as an individual, it is so easy for others to reject you. 

Independent expression that is by its nature not detrimental to others. Sun exalted. Vitality and personal 
power that can engender jealousy but not threat. In the white book: Individual expression that attracts 
attention but not threat. Those individuals that go through the process of making mistakes learn how to 
couch their language in such a way that they are not threatened in their expression of "I know." 

Then you have the Pluto in detriment. An individual mysteriousness that attracts active suspicion and 
threat. In the white book: The Freak. Individual expression that attracts suspicion and threat. I am 
someone who has the 43.3/23.3. When Pluto was in the 43rd gate, which took place in 1990, I went 
through this process of having everybody deal with me as a black magician who is crazy and dangerous. 
It made a lot of people very uncomfortable. This is simply the nature of it. 

There is a whole generation of children being born with Pluto in that position and, when they grow up, 
they will not like me. What to do? By the way, the children that were born just after that generation have 
Neptune in 61 and I have my Design Sun in 6 Occult knowledge, and Neptune is exalted there. So the 
children that are a little bit younger than the other generation will like me. It balances out in the end. 

23.4 Fragmentation 

We are in the upper trigram, which is about externalizing. It is the recognition that there is something 
across the way. There is a recognition that one has to deal with it in a transpersonal way. It is about being 
fixed in the sense of being one-tracked and it says here, Fragmentation. Diversification without a 
perceived potential for synthesis. These are knowing-junkies. They move from one knowing to another 

and there is no way for them in which those disparate, diverse knowings add up to something. Due to the 
fact that there is no potential for synthesis, there is simply a collection of knowing. 

Sun exalted. Fatalism and egoism and damn the consequences. When these people get into their knowing 
trip, it is all they can externalize, even if it has nothing to do with anything else. These people simply 
want to get that knowing out and externalize it. They have a one-track mind. That is the resonance, by the 
way, to the 43.4, the One-track mind. 

The other side of this is the Earth in detriment. Atheism and paranoia. Individuals that simply put out 
knowing that is of no value to the collective, individual expression that has no collective value. If the 
collective is not interested in what the knower has to say, the knower is going to be shunned. So the 
knower then shifts to the next knowing, but it still has no value to the collective because it is an individual 
knowing process in which they are fixed. 

When you come to the detriment side, to the atheism and paranoia, to these kinds of knowers, knowing is 
all about three things: knowing what you can know, recognizing what is not worth knowing and being 
clear about what is unknowable. These people, because they are into so much knowing, they see that 
nothing really is of value. Because of that and because the outside world is going to appear to be cruel to 
them because they are going to be rejected by it, they can become very paranoid about releasing their 
knowing, very paranoid about the way that they see people coming towards them. The fear of that 
rejection and that paranoia becomes paranoia that there is no cosmic protection either, that there is no God 
to hear their prayer anymore than there is an individual or a person out there willing to hear and take in 
their knowing. 

Again, it is so easy for human beings to be moralistic, and the moment that you get a description of a line 
like that, it is so easy to jump on that. "Aha, this is not good." It is not about that. This, after all, is the gate 
of Amorality. It is not about the morality of the line. For every single line and for every single aspect, you 
will have a value. One of those bizarre funny knowings that the fourth line can get into in their one-track 
trip is that it can ultimately turn out to be of enormous value. It is just difficult for them to get that out and 
they are very uncomfortable inside because there is this deep fear of rejection. 

Remember, the individual process (to say, "I know"), always places you at risk because if you can't 
explain it, you are a fool or worse. So, here in the fourth line, with all of this movement and diversity, 
there is not enough depth for a real explanation, and the depth does not permit the synthesis. And so, out 
of that can come a great deal of anxiety. "They are never going to know what I mean." This is the real fear 
in the 23. The fourth line is the one that lives out pure individuality because they simply put their 
knowing out and do not pay any attention to the consequences. They just don't care. But they do. This is 
very disturbing for them. 

23.5 Assimilation 

Remember that the first line always gives you the basis or the nature of the hexagram but the fifth line 
always tells you the way the world looks at it. The fifth line is in resonance to the second line, which 
projects out, and the fifth line is projected on. What is projected onto the fifth line is that it is there to be 
assimilated and to assimilate. This is one of the keys to the individual and it also shows you the pressure 
that comes from the outside that is placed on the individual. "Yes, you are very interesting, but be like us. 
You might know something but you'd better behave the way we behave because, otherwise, you will have 
problems with us." The individual cannot survive in the world without some capacity for assimilation. 

The practical acceptance of the values of another path. Jupiter exalted. Expansion and contribution 
through assimilation. There is no way for the individual to survive and allow its gifts to penetrate into the 

world without this gift of being able to assimilate, without this gift of being able to find some way 
socially to integrate oneself into the community. 

The Moon in detriment. Motive -driven assimilation from an inferior position, i.e., for protection or 
nourishment. These are people that really trade off their knowing. This is the individual that will sell out 
their knowing because they recognize that the assimilation is so important. Remember that everybody is 
projecting onto the 23.5 that they know. Because of that, the outside also wants them to bring that 
knowing out, even if they can't explain themselves. The moment that they can't explain themselves, all 
that falls apart. 

So, here in the white book, the Jupiter side is: The gift of communicating individual insight to the 
collective. Here is the gift of reaching out to the collective through assimilation. On the other side, we 
have: Motive driven assimilation for acceptance and protection from the collective. "I will be nice to 
them. I am not going to tell them what I know. I want them to like me. I don't want them to throw me out. 
A couple of years from now, maybe, when they really do accept me I'll tell them what I know." 

This is what usually happens with the fifth line and again, the nature of how somebody can express their 
individuality is almost exclusively conditioned by their culture, by their family environment when they 
were young, usually within the first seven years. The impact of how you are conditioned by the outside 
world when you are an individual child has enormous impact for the rest of your life, whether or not you 
are going to have the courage to be able to express your "I know", or whether you spend all of your time 
being concerned about being accepted by the society around you. 

The vast majority of individuality on this planet is more concerned about being accepted and not being 
rejected by the totality' than they are aboutestablishingi their knowing in the world. As you can see from 
this projected pressure from the outside, theigreatest'presswre on the individual is to assimilate. Once you 
have established the value of your knowing,, after that, you have to be like everybody else. 

23.6 Fusion 

When you come to the sixth line, to the end of the process, you come to this place of transition.. As we. 
have seen already, it is rare fop the sixth line to be actively involved in the process of the hexagram 
because it is so interested) in what is going on in the whole circuit. When you are dealing with the 
circuitry of Individuality,, yow are dealing with an emormously complex circuitry. The! moment-you are 
looking owl towards all of that circuitry, what you are really looking owl towards is: Is any knowing of 
value if: it does not lead) to m iutatiomt This is the! nature of the sixth line here.. In order for knowing to 
lead to mutation, this is; a process that comes out of bringing the diversity into synthesis, as a fusion. 

This line is. called Fusion. It says: The! gradual attunement of diversity through synthesis. The! first thing 
to recognize is that these are indiMidualb that will take the longest time to express their "I know." Built 
into them is a genetic recognition that each knowing is a block that eventually )builds a structure a this is 
the channel of Structuring) in which the! knowing is so clear that the! mutation is then possible. 

Mars exalted. The exponential growth of energy and its power of assertion engendered by fusion. In the 
white book: Individual knowing which brings diversity through synthesis. But that takes time. These are 
not the kind of knowers that jump up and say, "I know, I know." There is this sense of knowing in them, 
but there is also this sense that the knowing is not complete. Knowing is about knowing who you are and 
why you are. That is the core of knowing. For the individual, that is the essence for them. That is a 
complex process because you have to live long enough to be able to get some kind of an impression of 
what it is to be in this world, in your own life. 

Jupiter in detriment. The principled but futile withdrawal from fusion that leads to atrophy. This is the 
sixth line saying, "I know a lot of things but I don't know what I really need to know and I have had 
enough. It is not possible. How can I find that knowing that will lead to mutation? I have been going 
through all of these knowings and I don't know how all of that can fit together." 

Individual knowing that holds on to diversity and loses its power in expression. The sixth line can only 
express a knowing that is mutative. Otherwise, it is not really going to bother. Of course, as a child, it will 
go through the "I know, I know" process, like all children that are individual in terms of the mental or 
throat process, but the reality is that, as they mature in life, they are going to hold back more and more 
and more until they have that opportunity to see the synthetic knowing. If not, they'll wait. We have been 
looking at how sixth lines move to the next hexagram. We saw how the abstract shifts over to the logic 
and how the logic jumps back over to the abstract, and here, in this individual process, we have this 
remarkable movement. VWte have this movement that goes from the 23.6 to the 8.1. 

The 8.1 is the very next hexagram and it is the mirror to the 23 because it is out of the 8 that its potential 
contribution can be made to society, not at a mental level, but in terms of identity and direction. 

HEXAGRAM 24 RETURNING 

Here, we have the individual acoustic process in the center. The individual mind resonates both to the 
splenic side, the awareness wave, and the emotional wave and it is always all over the place in time. It is 
not simply in the now. There is only one gate that is existential, the 20th gate, and even that is relative. 
The now is something that does not last very long. 

We are dealing with the relative present when we are dealing with individuality and that present is always 
both reflecting on what is past and projecting on what is in the future. But it is not doing this visually. 

This is an acoustic process and it has to do with what has been taken in, in terms of what has been heard. 
Part of what we hear, we hear very accurately in the now and other parts of what we hear, we don't hear 
well at all. We hear in waves. This means that we only remember parts of what has been said, not all of it. 

When you are dealing with the nature of the individual, you are dealing with the dilemma of knowing. To 
know what you can know, to know what you can know but what is not important for you to know, and to 
know what is unknowable. If you cannot distinguish between those three, you will never find silence in 
your mind. That is the one thing the individual mind is looking for: silence. In the same way that the 
abstract mind does not want any bad, old movies anymore, the individual mind would just like to have 
silence, quiet in there. 

We are looking at the channel of Awareness, a design of a thinker, and Returning, the gate of 
Rationalization: the awareness to struggle for knowing or mot. This is the whole thing. Can. it be known? 
This goes back to the: 28/38, the channel of Struggle, amd the 28, the fear of death.. Is it really 
worthwhile?' 16 life of value? Is itworth it? Its it something that can be known amd, if so, does it deserve 
struggle? Is itworthwhile to really know it? You can become a nudear physicist but it-does not mean that 
it is worthwhile for you to have that kind of knowledge. 

It is just not about recognizing what is knowable. It is about whether you should struggle for that 
kmowimg or not. The. awareness potential is the relentlessness, of the unresolved thinking. The return: 
you go back again and again because! yow cani t resolve it and,, until you can resolve it, you will not 
have silence. You have to resolve whether it is knowable, whether it is worth knowing and worth 
struggling for. 

Abowei the lines; it says:: The natural and spontaneous process of translorntwtufon and renewal. It is the 
pulse. One moment it is not there and the next moment you can know it. 

24.1 The Sin of omission 

First line, foundation: The. sin of omission. Transformation that requires retrogressive periods before 
renewal can take place. Sun exalted. The will to triumph and in this case the faith thatthe end jusfihes the 
means.. All of this is the result of inspiration. The 24 gets an inspiration and, as it says; in the white book: 
Inspiration that demands a reassessment of past thinking before a rational concept can be established. Is 
this really the knowing? Do I really know this? I have to go back and see if this is really correct. 

The Neptune in detriment. Self-delusion which unnaturally justifies periods of retrogression. In the white 
book: Inspiration that leads to an irrational focus on what is past. Everything about the individual is the 
potential for what is new. They live in a collective and tribal world and the whole thing for them is that 
they are always looking for the framework. "Is this something that I can make rational?" The only way to 
make it rational is: "What is it like?" so then they go back into their knowing system. "Is it like this or like 
this? Is it really different?" 

The whole foundation of the knowing process is to eliminate what is not original because the moment that 
you see that it is something from the past, the moment that you can reference it, is the moment you put it 
aside. 

The whole thing about the individual mind is that it has to generate something new. It is not there to 
produce something that is old. For example, you are working on a piece of music and you have a tune that 
is running through your head and you think, "I just came up with a nice tune. That is my tune." If you 
have the first line, there is immediately this, "Wait a minute, let's check it out. Is it really my tune? Did I 
hear this somewhere else before? Is it like another song that I heard?" In the detriment, you get so focused 
in that that you never sing your own tune because you are constantly going back and trying to figure out: 
"Did I borrow this from somebody? Did somebody influence me with this? Is it really mine?" If it is not 
really theirs, they cannot keep it. 

24.2 Recognition 

This line has no introspection. So, here we have Recognition. The Moon exalted. The proper and 
spontaneous adaptation to new forms. "I have this new melody." There is no checking in this line. Mars in 
detriment. The vanity to see transformation as a personal achievement rather than a socially supported or 
natural phenomenon. 

What you have here is: The potential gift of conceptualizing spontaneously. "I have this new melody." 
Because there is no introspection and because you just project that out, somebody will say to you, "That is 
not new." That is a big crash for the 24.2's. "What do you mean? It is my melody." "That song was 
recorded in 1972. I have it at home. This song of yours is plagiarism." All second lines get into trouble 
because they are always projecting, without the introspection to go with it. 

On the other side: The mental vanity that such a gift can produce. "I don't care what you say. It is my 
melody. I know that it is mine." 

24.3 The Addict 

This is the line of adaptation. Here, the resonance from both the emotional side and the splenic side is 
bonds made and broken. This becomes very difficult. It becomes a hooking into and a snapping out of the 
knowing process. This can be very difficult because, after all, this gate is called Returning. It is about 
going through the process of figuring out what is knowable, what you can know, and what is worth 
knowing. 

This line is called The Addict. The powerful attraction of regressive forms. Venus exalted. The ultimate 
though difficult triumph over regression. Jupiter in detriment. Addiction and regression legitimized by 
success. 

The third line has the capacity to reach out to the other side, though it can be very irresponsible in the way 
it does that. The 24.3 wants the 61. That is all. It keeps on hooking into the inspiration of the 61 and then 
breaks the bond with the inspiration. After a while, this becomes very irrational because there is no real 
work at making it rational. It is irresponsible, after all. It does not matter whether that "I know" is 
knowable or not. "I know the name of God." That can bring a lot of success to somebody. "I am the son of 
God. I will tell you about it." It is irrational because we cannot know that name. At the same time, success 
can legitimize that kind of illusion. "I know what is unknowable." That can be something that gets 
justified by success. 

These individuals have an enormously difficult time because when you meet a 24.3 and if they do get to 
the throat naturally through the 43/23, their ability to explain themselves is deeply limited and they end 
up sounding like abstract people. They end up asking you to believe them. They are just interested in the 
constant flow of inspiration. They are looking for the other side and they try to rationalize it for a moment 
and then they go over to the next thing. They can be very good at debunking people. When they are 
mature, they can recognize false knowers. They are very valuable for that. They know who is just making 
a show to get other people's attention. 

24.4 The Hermit 

The externalization process in this line is the most anti-social of all mental processes. The individual's 
primary goal is to preserve its integrity. The individual mind is not there to be influenced. That is why it 
is so obsessed with checking whether it has been influenced or not. It is there to be original and mutative 
as a force. When you get to the line of The Hermit, the fixedness of this line is, "Don't influence me." It is 
always trying to keep influences away and tends to be the kind of mind that works best when it is alone. 

Transformation that can only take place in isolation. Saturn exalted. The discipline and focus that assures 
renewal. Neptune in detriment. The tendency in isolation to live in a fantasy world. That living in a 
fantasy world is not a negative. It can be deeply creative. 

Aloneness enriches the potential for rational thought; and Aloneness encourages the potential of illusion 
or delusion. Aloneness is a keynote here. They are fixed on being alone. The only way that you can get to 
these people is through the brotherhood/sisterhood, through kindness that can end up as meanness. After a 
long time, they may tell you what they know and they may listen to what you say. For them to be able to 
come to a rational point in their process, they need to be alone. I always tell these people the same thing. 
"Be alone. Work out your knowing alone." 

24.5 Confession 

The fifth line is the penultimate of a hexagram. It is the part of the hexagram that is the universal element 
of whether the nature of the hexagram is really there to go into the world. 

Confession. The courage to admit the mistakes of the past. One thing to recognize about the nature of 
knowers is that what the knower knows at any given moment can mutate and a new knowing can replace 
it. That is either a natural process that is taken in stride, the knower getting a new knowing, or it can 
become full of all kinds of problems psychically: "I know this now but the reason that I did not know it 
before is that I had a problem before with this person. I was not trained properly. I was not given enough 
information." 

Moon exalted. The practical value of starting with a clean slate, symbolized by the new Moon. Mars in 
detriment. The tendency to try to minimize past mistakes through rationalization, turning confession into 
justification. The most important thing for a knower is to be able to say, "I made a mistake. I did not 
know. I thought I knew but I didn't. Now I know." This is very, very important for the knowing process. 
This is part of what the seduction is. 

The nature of this confession is: Rational correction that opens the way to new possibilities. "I did not 
know before but now I know." Now there is a new possibility that is waiting. 

On the other side: Irrational justification of past mistakes. Because the knower is always trying to attract 
attention, they always put their knowing out there. They come and tell you something and two weeks 

later, they come back to you and say, "This is wrong." Then they make up all these excuses why they did 
not know it in the first place. This can become obsessive. That knowing can be transformed. 

The moment that there is mutation, there is a new knowing that comes along. This is a natural process but 
it means that at the heart of every knower is the capacity to confess. This says a great deal about the fact 
that in the 20/10 and the 25/51, which are both mystical channels that are part of the individuality process, 
there is a need to confess that they did not know. I know; I have been in that process myself. I was an 
enormously arrogant man who denied all kinds of mystical and supernatural phenomena. I did not only 
debunk it, I defamed it. The reality is that I had to confess to myself that I did not know. I was ignorant. 
Now I know. Now I have a new possibility. 

This is one of the important things in the process of an individual: to accept that one did not know. Think 
about the resonance: the second line goes out and says, "I have a new melody." This fifth line will go out 
and say, "You were right. I made a mistake. It was not my melody. It was that old melody you told me 
about." This is what makes the knower acceptable. The moment that the knower cannot make the 
confession of not knowing, they are no longer acceptable. They will no longer be tolerated and these are 
the individuals that will really get hurt by the outside, being alienated from the outside. They will really 
be the freaks that get rejected. By the way, the fifth line of the abstract mind was The Saint, and here we 
have the Confession. 

24.6 The Gift Horse 

The sixth line is the line of transition which is moving towards the next step, to the 2. 1 , where the driver 
is. It goes directly into an individual process. 

This is the recognition of what is sterile and what is not. The Gift horse. The possibility of being deaf 
when opportunity knocks. For the sixth line, it is not important whether it can know something or not, or 
know something which is knowable or unknowable. What is important here is mutation. It is the only 
thing that is important to the sixth line. Mutation here goes directly to the magnetic monopole (from the 
24.6 to the 2.1). It goes directly to direction, to bringing the mutation out as a direction for life and the 
possibility is that they are going be deaf. They won't hear it. 

Jupiter exalted. The conscious participation in a process that prepares one for easy identification of 
opportunity. The other side is: Innate suspicion which leads inevitably to lost opportunities. The 24.6 can 
always work on the knowing and thus, they can be very good thinkers. None of that thinking is of any 
value to them unless there is something inside of them that says, "Aha, this can lead to mutation." Often, 
they look like they are missing something, that they do not really see it. The fact is: they do. They just 
know if something will not get to mutation. When I say they know that, remember that they may know in 
that moment and it may not be so, but nonetheless that is their knowing. 

Identification and focus with the rational thought process; or Ohen irrational suspicion that distorts the 
focus and can lead to missed opportunities. The suspicion is about whether the knowing will mutate. It is 
just not about whether it can be known. These are deep knowers. They are very clear people. What they 
are concerned about is the only thing that will make it worthwhile. Remember the 28.6, Blaze of glory. 
You can be suicidal in that. The only thing that makes it worthwhile, the only thing worth knowing is 
something that is really leading to mutation and a new direction. If they don't get it in their lives, they can 
be very depressed, constantly ignoring opportunities that are brought to them and of course, the moment 
that you see a line that talks about missed opportunities, you know it means that they have all kinds of 
opportunities in their life. Opportunities will always come. 

The nature in this sixth line is that it is looking for the mutation. What I tell these people is that only the 
things that they do click to are the things that are of value to them. I tell them not to worry about all those 
missed opportunities. They do. This is Returning. They go back and say, "Maybe that one could have 
mutated." 

There is a resonance here to the third line, The Addict. The addict gets an enormous amount of 
inspiration. They are always sucking it in and then they break the bond. What happens to the sixth line is 
that, early in their life, they jump a lot. They can because they know. They jump a lot and discover very 
quickly that it is not easy to get things into mutation. That leads them to take their distance. Once they 
have been burnt, they really back off and wait for their opportunity, for the one that really does it for 
them. 

HEXAGRAM 25 INNOCENCE 

We discussed the collective gates of love (see the discussion in the 15th gate and in the 46th gate) and I 
hope that the impression that you were left with is not about the way in which love is externalized, but 
internalized. Everything about the love rooted in the ego or the love rooted in electro-magnetic 
connections is all about the externalization of love, but it has nothing to do with the Higher Self. It has 
nothing to do with our connection to the totality. That has to do with the internalization of love. We saw 
in the love of humanity that, rather than it being the cliche, 'Love thy neighbor', it is to be oneself and to 
allow everybody else to be themselves. That generates a healthy aura. 

When it comes to the physical body, the greatest dilemma that people have in their life is that most human 
beings don't like the body they were given. It does not mean just the aesthetic values of the body. It has to 
do with what seem to be the potentials of that body, whether it is the nature of the brain, the type of 
metabolism, the shapes or the sizes, and it has to do with the fact that the body is a burden. 

In order for the body to be healthy, the experience of being in the body has to be accepted without 
question. That is the nature of what it is to love oneself in terms of loving what it is to be in the body: to 
love the flesh. To love the flesh is to accept that what one is and what one has is exactly what one is 
supposed to have and exactly the right thing for one's karma, for one's geometry in this life, and that the 
only way in which you are healthy is if you surrender to life. That is what the 46 is all about. It is about 
surrendering to life. 

The 44 is part of the mechanism that is rooted in the 46. That is, these splenic gates are guided by its 
prime gate 46, to surrender to what it is to be alive. The first thing to recognize about collective love is 
that it is not what you think that is. It is collective only in the sense that it becomes love in the world out 
of the collective, but out of each and every single one of the collective. Again, see clearly that the two 
collective gates of love are directly opposite two individual gates of love and this individual process, 
because we are individuated beings, is at the core of our experience. So it is not about one's capacities to 
bring love out into the world, it is about the inside. It is about accepting what it is to be oneself. 

The 25th gate is very complex because it is part of the centering circuit and therefore, it is an essential 
ingredient in turning everything towards individuality. The centering circuit, like the defense circuit, is a 
minor circuit. Minor circuits can always be added, or their influence can always be connected, to any 
other circuit. So the centering circuit, whenever it is present, always brings things towards their 
individuality. That is the first thing. 

The second thing about the 25th gate: you can see that the gates of love are constructed out of circuitry 
that is both individual and collective, and there is no tribal possibility. The tribal possibility to connect to 
love is through the 51/25. So the 25 not only represents a capacity to express love for the individual, it is 
also at the heart of how the love of self is available to the tribe as well. More than that, the 25th gate has a 
highly mystical value which we will not deal with here. It is not possible to teach the mystical value of 
any of these gates without really understanding that the structure of the hexagram has to be seen 
differently. The mundane values of the 25th gate are what I will deal with here. 

Above the lines it says: The perfection of action through an uncontrived and spontaneous nature. 'The 
perfection...' Perfection is not a word you find very often, particularly in the Rave I'Ching. '...of action...' 
Right away there should be an enormous question in your head: what the hell has action to do with the 
25th gate? The 25th gate is part of the G center and is not connected to a motor, '...through an 
uncontrived...' Not motivated, not made up, not predetermined; not worked out. '...and spontaneous 
nature.' Nature is a word that is specifically related to the 10th gate. The 25th gate and the 10th gate have 

a deep connection to each other because they are both about a possibility of centering the nature of 
humanity, that is, centering the behavior of the individual so that the individual can survive in the world. 

25.1 Selflessness 

The first line always gives you the foundation. This first line in particular is something that is very 
profound and, when you get into its deepest levels, you really begin to recognize the nature of what 
universal love is all about. The first line is called Selflessness. Here we are in the self. 

The 25 is pointed towards the most dynamic willpower in the body. It is pointed towards the deepest 
sense of ego power because the will in the 51 is an enormous thing, and that will is deeply possessive. "I 
am the power," says the 51, and the 25 says, "No, the power exists." The 25 is selfless in the sense that it 
is not going to claim ego power. The 51 says "I am the jumper," and the 25 says "There is only the jump." 
There is no claim, no possessiveness here. One cannot possess the universe. Motiveless action. 

Here, we come to a very important impact in the genetic continuity of the global program because, in the 
25.1 and the 25.3, we have lines that are impacted by the fact that neither Neptune nor Pluto has been in 
Aries for a very long time. The 25/51 is an Arian channel and both Pluto and Neptune have been far away 
from being able to activate this channel of Initiation for many years. (Please see the section on Outer 
Planet Transits in the Glossary in Volume 2.) 

The first thing to recognize about Selflessness is that the overview is motiveless action. It is something 
that has to be learned. It is an overview. We are all conditioned to be motivated, all of us. We are 
conditioned to have a motive. If you do this, you get that. We are always conditioned by motivation. 
Neptune exalted. The universalization of activity. Psychic attunement that is its own reward. This line 
does not exist in the world. Neptune will get there in about 30 years, probably around the time that the 
cycle changes (2027). Pluto will be in Aries in 2080. 

What we have is the Mercury in detriment. It is the only thing that is active in the first line and remember 
that this is the foundation. This is the foundation of what selflessness is in our age. It is: A tendency to 
publicize one's selflessness. Mother Teresa, Princess Diana, all this propaganda about how selfless one is. 
It is not enough to be a quiet philanthropist. Everyone has to blow their philanthropic horn. That is, 
everybody is making a claim about their selflessness. "Look how selfless I am. Look, I have no motive. I 
am just a wonderful person." 

In the white book: The potential for centering through attunement to challenges. That does not exist. We 
don't have that. There will be a generation born with it some day, but what we are dealing with now is: 
The insecurity of the Self manifested in times of challenge. That is very productive for us. We live in an 
era where the Self is insecure and so we have an enormous movement throughout the world that people 
try to secure their identity. "Who am I? What am I? Where am I? Is there a motive? Is only God great?" 
You can see that the detriment here is one of the keys to the revival of fundamentalism and theocracies in 
the world, this lack of identity being imprinted by old religious symbols onto people. 

The insecurity of the Self manifested in times of challenge. Challenge is a keynote for the channel. That 
is, the competitiveness that lies in initiation always has to deal with the challenge of the ego that must be 
met. What happens here in the challenge from the ego is that the selflessness is there, but it always has to 
be expressed because there is uncertainty about the quality of identity. In other words, the identity is not 
strong enough just to be silently motiveless, that identity has to be able to say, "Look what I have done. 
Ain't I terrific? I hope that they are going to make me a saint." 

This is lower trigram, so it does not know that the 51 and its power is there. It can be quite shocking, 
obviously, to meet that and the spirit of the Self is always challenged by that shock. So, the first thing to 
recognize is that we live in a time in which the global identity is very weak, because this is the foundation 
of the Self in our era. "Please, Master, tell me who I am." During the transit of Mercury, we may discover 
what selflessness is, which means to recognize the motives that are at the root of our actions. It may seem 
selfless, but in reality is not. 

25.2 The Existentialist 

In these gates of love, we will see that we have certain lines which are unusual in their performance or 
values. This second line is particularly so. It embodies the nature of what innocence really is. Innocence is 
only possible existentially. There is no other way to be innocent. Following what we have seen about 
collective love, that collective love is rooted in being oneself: selflessness, motivelessness, is rooted in the 
now. Only in the now is one free of guile. 

The Existentialist. Devotion and dedication to the now. Like all lower trigrams, the motivelessness is only 
broken by the other side stepping in because this is the nature of the hexagram. The motivelessness is 
there naturally - it is only broken by the other side stepping in. In this moment, what has been motiveless 
and selfless can take on another nature. When somebody says to you, "You are so selfless," that is the 
moment that your selflessness begins to disappear. 

Mercury exalted. The perfection of the intellect through concentration and focus on what is, rather than on 
what could be or has been. If you look inside the 25.2, you see somebody who is just in the now. They 
don't know why they are doing the things that they do. They are just there in that process. This does not 
mean that that is intellectual, or that they have that intellectual capacity. That is, some will and some 
won't. It will depend on their design and on whom they meet. But the fact of the matter is that the longer 
the 25.2 is allowed to be in its motivelessness, the more it will come to recognize ultimately, at the 
intellectual level, what it means to be surrendered. Again, this is the nature of what universal love is all 
about. Universal love is the acceptance that we are helpless in all of this and that all you can do is to not 
interfere but be right there in the now. 

On the other side, Mars in detriment, which by its very nature is immature. A dedication that can never be 
free of personal motivation and its attendant projections. This is because of others. This is the moment 
where the 25.2 is seen by somebody for what they are. "Oh, you have been so motiveless, so selfless, but 
really, you should be rewarded." It is not that they just do this for nothing. They don't even know what 
they are doing. 

They are just in it, but the outside force is going to come on them and because of that, this projection 
comes in. With projection, there is this mixing of terms where, all of a sudden, the individual, like the 
abstract, is suddenly trying to figure out what the pattern is going to be. "If I stay selfless, I will become a 
saint." That can only come from the outside coming in. 

In the white book: The innocence of the Self and its protection can only be maintained in the now. 
Because this is an overview line, these people are pulled out of the now all the time. When they are pulled 
out of the now, they are shocked. Often it is projected on them that they had a motive all along, but they 
did not. 

The whole thing to see is that the love that can be generated out of these gates is what has been generated 
for the benefit of the totality. It comes out of the individual, but it is there for the global whole. This 25.2 
is a very beautiful motivelessness but, of course, it has to meet the world and because it is not equipped to 
deal with the world, it can end up losing its innocence, which means it loses its existential nature. 

After all, regardless of the perspective of the driver, whether we are looking forward out of the window, 
or whether we look backwards in the mirror or whether we are just simply there, we are all in the present 
together. \% are all in the now of the experience together and the world is fundamentally existential, 
whether we like it or not. The only way to be is to be in the now, whether we can or not, because we 
simply are, regardless of our illusion. 

25.3 Sensibility 

The trial and error line is a deeply mystical line and, as such, it has quite a different value, in a way, at the 
mystical level. It is an overview line. Sensibility. The recognition that innocent action does not in itself 
guarantees success. This is not the 46. In my work with people, because I am somebody with the 25.3 and 
the 51, I keep on reminding them that life is not about being happy. It is not about being successful. It is 
not about any of those things because all of those things carry with them expectations, motivations and 
rewards. It is simply about living your life; that is all. 

One of the things that you learn in the 46th gate is that if you do live out your nature, you can be lucky. 
That is, good things can come to you as well as bad things. But at least those things belong to you. So, 
innocent action, being innocent, does not mean that life will be a success. By being existential, that does 
not mean necessarily that you are going to be happy or sad. 

Remember that this is individual and individual is melancholic and melancholy is about happy and/or sad. 
It does not mean that life is going to be wonderful just because you are innocent. It can be a horror. There 
are so many human beings in the world that are forced to live existentially and live at the edge of society, 
moment by moment by moment. It can be a very unpleasant thing. Nonetheless, by living existentially, 
one opens up the possibility for universal love in the world. This is the real surrender. Not "my will be 
done," but "thy will be done." This is just to be here in the wave. 

The nature of this line: this is a very profound line for our time because it is an indication that we live in 
an era, up until 2080, in which it is really possible for us to transcend trial and error and reach wisdom. 
The reason for that is that we do not have the detriment in this line. 

Pluto in detriment. The potential loss of innocence through misfortune that in the extreme can manifest 
from crime to suicide. Jiirgen and I went looking back to the era where Pluto was in Aries and was 
activating this line. We looked for famous people. There were none. The only thing that we could find for 
that date is the Brazilian Republic which I think lasted two years. Around this time, in 1820, we had the 
growth of prisons. This was a direct result of Pluto being in the 25.3. 

By the way, I want to add to my comment about the ego in this line in terms, of doing analysis for people. 
If -you see somebody with a 25.3 who has an open ego, it does not work the same way. The 25.3 without 
the power of the ego to be able to withstand the shock is going to have problems with its innocence. It 
will get through because of the inactive Plutonic side, but the fact is that the ego is mentioned in Ibis way 
here. It is essential to understand that a strong ego is something very important in that kind of 
configuration. We live in pan era in which the shattering of innocence does not (lead to failure and crime, 
does not lead to abuse, but does lead 'to what is always present in the 25th gate, which is (blood. This is 
the gate of blood. This is the gate of the spirit of the life, the spiriit in the blood. 

What we have instead of this Pk*omic detriment is a Mars exalted. 'The power of the ,Ego... Right away, 
we have something interesting here because -we have been seeing -all along that whenever the ego is 
imemtiomed, we get to see a detrimental impact on the nature of the Self. In other words, we get to see 
the Self trying to be possessive and claim something, instead of just accepting the nature of what is. But 

here we have something very different: Mars exalted and particularly at its best in this sense. (Mars is 
exalted in Aries anyway.) ... to withstand failure and still maintain its nature. 

In my work, I have analyzed all kinds of things in the nature of my life and obviously, I paid a lot of 
attention to imy experience with the Voice and the mechanisms at work. There is no question for me that 
my survival of that was rooted in the fact that I have the 25.3, one of the many things that kept me alive in 
that experience so that I was not destroyed. The fact that there was no Pluto there. The fact that there was 
no possibility of that really becoming not only shattered by the experience, but criminal. 

With the knowledge that I was given, I could have stayed secretly a black magician. I still could. The 
knowledge that I was given, the things that I was told that I could do, the things that were possible with 
the knowledge that was given to me; but I do not live in a Plutonic age where that criminality is 
something possible, out of that shattering in the trial and error. 

Remember that the third line does not know that there is something on the other side. It is not 
transpersonal. It is different when you have the whole channel. That is what Initiation is all about. It is 
about the recognition of that. But the fact is that the third line, by itself, does not know that. 
In the white book: The power of the spirit to withstand failure and shock. Failure in its motiveless action: 
in other words, that motiveless action suddenly is something that just falls apart. All right, that motiveless 
action has to meet a more powerful force and is shocked. All right, it will find a way to maintain its 
innocence, regardless of that. 

25.4 Survival 

The 46.4 is an exalted fourth line. It is the line of Impact. This 25.4 is its polarity; it is exactly opposite 
the 46.4, and it is one of the most exalted lines that we are going to find. It is one these rare lines that has 
a double exaltation, like in the 11.4. So you notice that in fourth lines, there are some very important 
attributes simply because fourth lines can have a great deal of influence because they are one-tracked and 
fixed on their process and they are transpersonal. Remember that this is the only gate of the Self pointed 
to the ego and the relationship between the Self and the ego is one of the most important within our 
vehicle. So, when you have a transpersonal line in the 25th gate, this 25.4 knows the ego on the other 
side, knows what that ego is and what its power presents, and in that sense, it has the capacity over time. 

This is an overview line: The nature of true innocence can be maintained regardless of circumstances. The 
nature of true motivelessness. Here are people that are fixed (this is the harmony to the first line) and one- 
tracked in their selflessness and, of course, this is the great exaltation. Again, because of the overview 
line, you do not start off that way. 

Venus exalted. The beauty of the rose in the garbage dump. One of my favorite lines in the Rave I Ching: 
the beauty of the rose in the garbage dump, just for what it is. The manifestation, the one-trackedness, of 
innocence can exist in any kind of decadence. It makes no difference. 

In the white book: The spiritual warrior, the innocence maintained regardless of circumstances. Jupiter is 
also exalted. What you have is that Venus establishes our basic morals and Jupiter writes the law. The two 
of them together establish the framework of how societies and communities function. These two together 
in this line, and we find them together in the fifth line again, is a very important connection. Whenever 
you see Venus and Jupiter together in a line you know that is has a very strong impact on the way society 
sees and functions. The highest principles even amongst the greatest decadence. There is no significant 
difference in this language. 

There is no planet in detriment. What we have here is not only a fourth line that is by its very nature fixed 
and onetracked, but by the nature of the line itself is fixed and one -tracked. There is only exaltation. 
There is only this ability to maintain innocence regardless of the circumstance. A very beautiful line. 

The wonderful thing about being one -tracked is if it stays on the track, it will arrive, like a train when it is 
on the track: it will arrive. That is a security. The whole thing about being one -pointed when you are here 
in an existentialist line is that, no matter what happens to you, you are always remaining existentialist; 
that is the value here. 

25.5 Recuperation 

It is a very strange line. If the 46.5 is the weakest of the fifth lines, well, the 25.5 is not far behind. That is, 
this is a line that is weak for a reason, in the sense that the only time that most human beings are 
existential is when they are sick. Think about that. Think about the last time that you were ill. You were 
right there in the sickness. You can't escape it. It is unpleasant. You don't like it. It does not allow you to 
focus on the future. It does not really allow you to reflect on the past. It just keeps you stuck at being sick 
and, in being sick, you are in the now and, in being in the now, you are finally being yourself. 

Most human beings never come to themselves until they are sick. They do not come to themselves until 
they are sick because the sickness that they have is because they are not themselves in the first place. 
Because of that, in trying to heal themselves of that sickness, they are actually trying to come back to 
themselves, without understanding it. The moment that somebody recovers from an illness is a moment 
that they can start again to be themselves. 

Of course, they immediately go out and take on the same kind of conditioning again and get sick again. 
When they get sick again, they get thrown into the existential plane again, so they heal themselves on the 
existential level. There is no other way to heal other than in the now because you know that you can't get 
out until you are better. There is nothing you can do but be there. 

So, this is a very strange line. It is a great line of projection. Everybody is lo8king to that fifth line and 
projecting onto that innocence and motivelessness. "You are the innocent one. You are the motiveless 
one. You have the spirit that I, or humanity, could use." The now is about being healthy. 

Recuperation. When innocence is sapped of its vitality, healing... (This is the only line that speaks of 
healing.) ... is the first priority. When somebody projects onto you, remember the harmony to the second 
line and the problems with being brought to a place of motivation by others; here it is even stronger. What 
you have here is other people wanting to project onto your innocence, wanting your innocence to be their 
spirit. That takes strength away and, in taking vitality away, it takes away the vitality to be innocent in the 
now, and the only way that you can avoid that is to withdraw. 

Venus exalted. The ability to recognize the inner meaning of an affliction and to withdraw until it is 
healed. In the white book: The power of the spirit to heal and be healed. Only when you are in the now, 
only when you are being in the experience of your body, only when you are accepting your rhythm are 
you healthy. 

The mystery of this line is that healing oneself is about withdrawal from conditioning. This is what 
healing is about: to withdraw from conditioning and to heal the conditioners. Jupiter in detriment. 
Hypochondria and the need to be healed by others. This is something very important to understand. The 
moment that your innocence is sapped of its vitality and the moment that somebody is projecting onto 
your spirit, in that moment, you take in their conditioning and in the moment that you go for their 

conditioning, you become the sick one and they have to heal you. They, of course, heal you with what 
does not belong to you and so you stay the sick one. 

It is so important to understand what healing is really all about, that there is no need for anyone to be 
healed as long as they are not taken away from their nature. The moment innocence is sapped of its 
vitality, disease is in the world. So what that means is that as long as we are not being innocent, as long as 
we are not being what we are, we create disease, we create illness, and it is a self-serving process. 

After all, disease is one of the greatest employers in the world: hospitals, doctors, homeopaths, medicines, 
factories, recuperations, spas, healers. All of that comes back to the same thing. Universal love is getting 
down and realizing, "Hey, it is not up to me. All I have to do is to accept what it is to be me and I am 
going to be fine. But the moment I try to be something else, the moment I try to accept the conditioning to 
be something else, is the moment that I bring sickness into the world." 

If you don't live out your rhythm, you take love away from the world. If you don't live in your body and 
accept what it is to live in your body, you take away the capacity for success for humanity. The moment 
that you do not live selflessly, motiveless, you bring disease into the world. 

In the white book: The weakness of the spirit which requires healing from others. The fifth line is the line 
of priesthood and doctors. It is the priesthood of the healing shaman. It is the priesthood of blame, the 
blame that says, "You are sick because of this or that." That is both positive and negative. In other words, 
sometimes it is the truth and sometimes it is sheer nonsense. This is one of the ways to try to find out how 
we can be healthy. One of the things you will find about 25.5's is that they tend to be sickly. 

25.6 Ignorance 

Like any of these sixth lines we are dealing with, it is something that is outside of the basic nature of a 
hexagram. It is withdrawn from it. It is sitting above. Keep in mind that all of these sixth lines are going 
to flower soon. That is, when we step into the next cycle in 2027 and we are living in a sixth line- instead 
of a first line-theme, this is going to be the flowering of that: the opening up of the emotional spirit 
through the 55.6 and the beginning of a process in which sixth lines are going to come into a different 
epoch and really be part of their time. So we are in a developmental process towards that time where sixth 
lines come down from their roof tops and get involved. 

Everything about the nature of the 25th gate started in the overview of the lines in the first place. It said: 
The perfection of action.... When you come to the 25.6, you are dealing with a line that has a deep 
perspective: it can look into the centering circuit. It can look into Integration. It can look into the whole 
individual process and, as such, its vision, its ideal, is enormous by comparison. In order for it to make a 
commitment to anything, it has to see that the value of mutation is there. Without mutation, motiveless 
action does not mean anything. The whole substance then becomes useless. What action? What is the 
action that requires us to be motiveless? What action is the perfection of motivelessness? 

I am not somebody who spends much time, since the last 10 or 15 years, with what other people think 
about the nature of what it is to be, but it is one of those extraordinary questions and so many great 
thinkers are trying to come up with a formula. For me, it is clear that I am choiceless. It is the only thing 
that I can see as the simplest way of discovering what it is to be. For me, here, in this sixth line, lies the 
possibility to recognize choicelessness and to see that action is not something that has to be contemplated, 
but action is something simply to be accepted, to be accepted without motive. 

Ignorance. False innocence betrayed by actions. The Earth exalted. The milder of a negative position, 
where inappropriate action is censured. These children find out very quickly that, no matter how innocent 

they are, if the actions are not right, they get to suffer a great deal and they become very careful, later in 
their life, about what kind of action they engage in, to the point that they do not engage in action at all. 

Uranus in detriment. Constant inappropriate and destabilizing actions whose very counter-productiveness 
strips away the facade of innocence. It is not enough to be motiveless in one's spirit. One's actions have to 
be pure and unmotivated. They simply have to be a by-product of being. 

In the white book: The loss of innocence through inappropriate action, or Constant inappropriate action in 
times of challenge that can break the spirit. The 25.6 goes to the 17.1, which is all about collecting 
endless amounts of opinions. It is an openness to all kinds of stimuli. In other words: what has the 25.6 to 
do? My god, there are a lot of actions in the world. There are so many different ways, different formulas. 
The 17th gate is the great gate of organizing humanity. That is what it is there for. It comes back to the 
question of: what is innocence? The 25.6 can always look at the activities of others and they see clearly 
whether they are motivated or innocent. It can always tell. It has quite a gift in that sense. But for itself, it 
is a very difficult process. Only when they see that action can be motiveless, only then it is possible for 
them. It has to be concretized in their opinion. In other words, they have to see its value to humanity. 
They have to see that it has a mutative quality. 

These people often have their innocence broken but fortunately for them, they do not have the harmony to 
the 3 in detriment because Pluto is not there, so they do not suffer deeply in their innocence being broken. 
They simply pull away and withdraw. Withdrawal is one of the secrets of the 25th gate. Somebody who 
only has the 25 has to learn to move themselves away from others. When I was giving name-groupings 
for various hexagrams and I was putting together the hexagrams of aloneness (the 12, 33, 40)1 was very 
tempted to add the 25. I did not because I thought it would confuse people. It is so important to 
understand that the 25th gate is only at its best when it is alone because then it is innocent. 

Limitation is everything for humanity. Limitation (the 60th gate, part of the individual circuitry) says that 
there is a structure for everything. The only thing to recognize is the structure. Once you understand the 
nature of structure, then you can find a way to see that whatever moves through that structure will be a 
polarity, a binary like everything else in 

life, but the structure is the framework. The framework for a 25, the structure, in the language of 
individuality in the 43/ 23, is that when innocence is sapped of vitality, withdraw. Withdrawal means so 
much to innocence because it brings one back to the self. 

This is being in the cave, all by themselves. All that they say is, "I am now." They are pure innocence. 
Withdrawal and aloneness have enormous value to the 25. The 25.6 is great at being a fool on the hill, 
totally away from everything and quite common, in this day and age, watching television. Their favorite 
line then is, "look at that phony." 

HEXAGRAM 26 THE TAMING POWER OF THE GREAT 

We go from the small will (the 40) to the small ego. The small willpower in the 40 leads into the big 
willpower in the 51 and the small ego in the 26 crosses over to the 21, the big ego. Here we deal with the 
small ego. In sexual terminology, both the 40 and the 26 are gates of denial. They are fundamentally 
weak. That is why they need their rest. 

Think about the 26. We know that the instinctive side of tribal circuitry has to do with our organizational 
groupings on the material plane, our work culture. The 26th gate is the gate of the marketing manager or 
the sales person. One of the things that are so clear about the 26 is that while everybody else in the factory 
is working really hard and struggling to get the products out on time, on a deadline, administrating the 
organization and keeping the company happy, the 26 is on the golf course. It is playing golf and not doing 
its business. 

Please recognize that the ego cannot work the way in which everybody else who needs the ego wants it to 
work. Everybody wants the ego to be like the root center or the sacral center, but it is not. It is very 
different. 

I have told students of mine before, in the Gray courses, that one of the cute little mysteries of our design 
is that there is no direct connection between the ego and the sacral center. It there was one, we would not 
die. It is because the sacral center, with a direct connection to the ego, will stop the ego from being lazy 
and going to sleep. It just will. 

The moment the sacral has a direct connection to the ego, the ego would not be allowed to say, "I am a 
motor but I am not working today." Only the ego can do that because that is the kind of motor that the ego 
is. The difficulty that society has with the ego is the assumption that willpower has to operate like sacral 
power. It is not true. This is not a generator at all. 

Written above the lines it says: The maximization of the power of memory applied to the nurturing of 
continuity. The 26th gate is the gate of the egoist and it is the gate of exaggeration. The tribe expects to be 
exaggerated to. It is very important for the tribe. It likes that. This is the best refrigerator, the best car, the 
best country. Exaggeration is part of the way of getting the tribe to feel good. The 26th gate is the strength 
or lack of strength to apply memory. 

The whole thing to understand about the ego is that it is built on manipulation, and please do not think of 
this as a bad word. It is simply the ability to manipulate things. There are very few gates that are called 
'taming gates': The Taming Power of the Small (the 9th gate), to be able to take the broad spectrum of 
energy and to focus, tame it, to tame the root and its pressure by focusing it; and here, the capacity of the 
ego to manipulate instinctive memory. 

Because it is a small ego, it also must be massaged and, while everybody else is working so hard, the boss 
calls the salesman who is standing on the golf course with his cell phone. The boss asks, "Did you see the 
client?' Hoh, yes," says the 26. "Of course I did." That may or may not be true. The 26 may want to see 
that client, may think that they should see that client, but this is the ego and rest is important. 

"I really don't have the juice," says the 26. Only when the ego is understood for that nature can it be 
properly handled by 37's, 44's, 25's, or 45's. Until that is understood, there is only conflict with the ego. 

26.1 A Bird in the hand 

The first line establishes the foundation of what the hexagram is all about. Here we find A bird in the 
hand. The saying in English is, "A bird in the hand is worth two in the bush." In other words, it is really 
good to recognize what you have rather than trying to imagine what you could possibly get. This is one of 
the great lessons for the egoist. 

Neptune exalted. Whenever you see Neptune exalted in a first line you are allowed to shake your head 
and wonder. This is a foundation line and Neptune does not allow you to see anything. So the egoist never 
really gets into the foundation. They just sort of get confused about what it is to be them. 

The ability to enjoy the dreams engendered by accomplishment in order to avoid delusion of unlikely 
potential. Egoists make their living on what they can do. They make that living based on what they show 
they can and have done. The moment that the egoist goes out for the company and makes a sale, they can 
skate for weeks doing nothing, just floating along, feeling wonderful and living off that moment of 
accomplishment. "Did you see what I did? I did that. At any moment I could do it again, if I am in the 
mood. Treat me nice. Give me a good bonus. Allow me to go to the golf course." Meanwhile, everybody 
in the factory is sweating. 

Egos have a bad reputation for a reason. There are a lot of people dependent on the ego making the sale. 
If they do not make the sale, the people in the factory cannot make their living, the stockholders do not 
make any money, the boss gets fired. They are all sitting there waiting for the ego that is on the golf 
course. 

Mars in detriment. Accomplishment as a license for foolhardy risk taking. "I made that sale. Ain't I great? 
I will quit and see if I will get a better job," or "I should really be the boss of this company." 

The ego which transcends limitation through dreaming. This is one thing that is so wonderful about 
manipulation of memory. The 26 dreams of being a 21 because the 21 seems to be in control of 
everything and the 26 would love to be in control. "I am on the golf course four days a week. I work one 
day." What I tell 26's is that it is so important in their working life that they make sure they have enough 
leisure time because leisure time, vacations, are essential in order for them to be able to recuperate their 
energy. 

I know this so intensely in my personal life. I had Pluto defining my sacral center for seven years. It is 
gone now and I am back to being ruled by my ego and I know what that feels like. It is very different. The 
sacral pumps out the energy over and over. It is the ego that says, "Should I really do that? Maybe I'll just 
rest today. I have been able to achieve this and that. I don't have to do anything. Now I can escape for a 
while." That is what the ego does, so it can dream. The ego loves to dream. Let it accept what it has and 
let it go off dreaming about what is possible because it is the dream that sells. 

That is the gift of the 26 which it transmits to the tribe and, by doing so, it is able to bring the tribe the 
nourishment that it needs. That is the foundation. They are not very good at being handled. I am a 26.1, so 
whenever I would stop doing educational work when I was younger and got into business, it was always 
very clear to me that there was always somebody trying to put a finger on my time and my energy and my 
will. I am not very good at being handled. 

44's do the handling for the 26's. If the 44 does not know how to handle a 26, enormous problems will 
come into the organization. They simply do not function properly anymore. So this is interesting to 
recognize: you are dealing with a lower trigram and their commitment to society. It is a gate of denial. "I 
don't care about the people in the factory. I'll play golf today." This is not transpersonal. 

26.2 The Lessons of History 

When you come to the second line, you come to the situation where you can be seen. The 26 is not just 
the egoist, it is also the capacity to lie and to exaggerate: all of these things that are part of what is 
necessary to get information to the tribe. People look inside of the 26.2 and they see them as being either 
egoists or liars. These people are always being watched and they don't necessarily know that because 
second lines do not have that kind of capacity. What they say, whether it is an exaggeration or not, can be 
seen by others and, all of a sudden, they are paper tigers and suddenly meet somebody who says, "You 
said that." 

The lessons of history. The energy and depth of reflection to learn from the past in anticipation of the 
future. They learn that if you lie, then you'd better have a very good memory because, otherwise, you will 
get caught. 'Oh, entangled webs we weave, would first we practiced to deceive.' You will have to have a 
good memory. This is what they learn. They don't think anybody is listening to them. "I have caught this 
huge fish last night. It was an incredible thing. " The next day, their partner asks and it turns out that it was 
not true and they don't even remember because they do not think that anybody has actually listened to all 
that. But they are listened to because they can be seen as being an exaggerator, or being an egoist. 

Pluto in detriment. The urge to take action despite the evidence of history. To try to continue with your 
manipulation even when you have been found out. The whole thing about second lines is: they get found 
out. That is not bad because if they get found out enough, they can end up being the best liars and, by the 
way, being a liar is not bad. It depends on what you are lying about. By telling somebody, "This is the 
best refrigerator that has ever been made," yes, it is a lie, but the., person who is buying that does not 
want to hear, "This is the worst one ever made." Then you would not buy it. You don't want to hear, "This 
is all right. It is okay.. It works." You don't want to hear that either. You want to hear somebody saying to' 
you,, "I know that you are surprised) that it is only 1/1 Oth the priicef of a good refrigerator, but this is the 
best one ever. You will save a lot of money and be happy. Besides that, your mother and your neighbor 
bought one, so you must buy one too." 

This kind of lie is something that is very productive in ourcommunities because that is-what we expect, 
like on TV: "This product gets everything whiter than anythimg else." The tribe loves that. We all know 
that it is a joke.. But we! don't want to be told, "This is a so-so cleaner." \4 want to be told that it is. the 
best cleaner. The second) line gets found out but they discover that people are paying attention to them. In 
discovering that; they have to be careful. 

One of the things that 26's and 4N have to deal with in their life is the expectation of everybody else who 
is.dependemt on their ego.. So they put their ego and their willpower to the test every time, like the athlete 
that is pumped up one the! field: if the 40 makes a bad move, everybody is going to. boo them. They have 
to take the burden of:everybody else's expectation. With the 26, everybody else has an expectation that 
you are the only one that can sell the product. They are all depending on you. You have to take the burden 
of that as well. The fact of the matter is that 26's seek out a way to get out of the pressure so that they can 
recuperate their energy because the ego cannot work consistently, and then they go back in. In that space 
in between this is where all the lying takes place. It is not just lying; it is sometimes nothing more than 
exaggeration. 

This whole business about stretching whatever the truth happens to be: the 26 and the 40 will do that in 
order to protect their time, their energy and their ego from being shattered. When the 26 says, "This is the 
best refrigerator, please buy it," one out of every fourteen people will say "yes." Thirteen say "no." That 
26 has to deal with all of these no's. It is not so easy for that 26 to go back out into the world the next time 
because they know that, in order to get to the place where everybody thinks they are so wonderful, they 
have to go through a space where everybody thinks that they are terrible (the people who say, "Go away. I 
don't need this.") This is quite a role. The 26's are suppliers for the community. 

Someone who is just operating out of an undefined ego that gets pumped up by somebody else, blurts 
these things out and has no idea. Somebody with an ego not connected to an awareness system within 
them has no idea and no way of reflecting upon it. Yes, they can get very much caught up in the 
exaggeration itself and live it out. 

Of course, all the lower trigrams here get shocked anyway because the lower trigram will always meet the 
outside when it is least expected. So the 26.2 who does not think anybody is paying attention to it is on 
the golf course and suddenly meets the boss. The boss says "I thought you were with Mr. Jones." It is this 
moment where they get found out. This happens to them. "Mr. Jones died." 

I have trained sales people and they all lie, otherwise they could not do their job. They have to lie to 
themselves, too, just to give themselves the courage to go back out into the world and to deal with people 
that reject them. After all, we expect of the ego what no other center is expected to deal with. The ego is 
expected to deal with abuse, rejection. The jobs that no other center wants, they give to the ego. The ego 
will protect itself. It is unaware, so it uses the tools that are inherent to it. 

26.3 Influence 

This third line is an overview line like the 40.3. It is telling you that through trial and error, through 
adaptation, you have a lifelong process. The ability, once prepared, to gather support. 'Once prepared': it 
is a long-term process. These people really have a gift. Third lines are always the harmony to wisdom in 
the sixth line. The third line can develop through trial and error the kind of techniques that will allow it to 
manipulate memory, so that they can successfully serve the community. 

The Sun exalted. The authority to focus communal effort. They have to learn this. Remember something 
about the 26. The vast majority of the time, because the ego is unaware, this capacity to exaggerate, to 
transmit to the community, to enlarge things in order to make them attractive, can become what we call 
lying. But, at the same time, the 26 is capable of great truth, like all tricksters. They can tell you as great a 
truth as they can tell you a great lie because this is what is inherent in their capacity. 

The Saturn in detriment. There is nothing more to the point than a salesman that walks into the office and 
quits, saying, "I'll tell you why nobody can sell this product." They will tell you the truth and they will put 
it to you so clear that you cannot miss it. You can close down the factory and do something else. 

The leadership, while gathering support, will underestimate potential challenges. This is one of things 
about the ego: The ego gets carried away and it is vulnerable. It either does too much or it ignores the 
demands and threats that can come to it from others. Whenever you see terminology like 'threat' here, 
basically all this is talking about is demands that are made on this gate. The ego is always faced with 
demands being made on it, either the demands within itself (it depends on the design) or, most often, the 
demands that are coming from the outside. 

In the white book: The power of the ego to gather support. It takes time for that ego to develop that 
strength and only when it develops that strength can it gather support. Understand something about the 
ego: it is at its strongest when it can accept rejection. This is the only time that the ego is truly strong. No 
ego is strong that suffers from rejection. It is not possible. If you go out into the world and you are trying 
to get others to be interested in something, the ratio of those who will actually be positive with you is very 
small. Rejection is something that is inherent for the ego to learn about. It is why the ego likes to be left 
alone a lot, because when it goes out there into the world, it will have to deal with that quality of life that 
always brings rejection into its life. The ego is unable to recognize the challenges or the potential in 
others, or the potential challenges in others, certain demands on the ego. 

The whole thing about this third line is that you can learn through trial and error how to use your ego to 
influence the collective, but the moment that somebody sees that you have that gift, they want you to do 
that for them as well. Not only that but once they figure out what you are doing, they want to take it from 
you. Egos are always being challenged by competition. Always. Otherwise we would not have a patent 
office. 

26.4 Censorship 

The upper trigram gives us a transpersonal, manipulative skill. In other words, when you deal with the 
fourth and fifth lines in the 26, you are dealing with people who really do have a deep skill in them to 
transmit to the tribe, to be able to propagandize or market or take to the tribe. 

My nickname for the fourth line of Censorship is 'the Chernobyl line.' It is a very funny line. Listen to 
what it says: The alteration of memory through elimination. It is an overview line which means that it 
takes time in life. The memory system, what you remember, is changed by slowly removing things. It is 
like, by the time you actually give your resume to somebody that you want a job from, you have left out 
the jobs you don't want them to know about. This is the elimination of memory that comes over time. 

Pluto exalted. The ability through censorship to save the collectivity from itself. In other words, you have 
somebody in a hospital in Hamburg and the doctors think that it is, possibly the Ebola virus. If that were 
actually true,, it would create an enormous dilemma within the community.. So when the doctor says, 
"Until I am really sure, I am mot going to. tell) anybody. I am going to save! the collectivity from itself,, 
from its panic." That is one side. That is the positive side. 

When you get to the Saturn in detriment (Chernobyl): The use of censorship to maintain the status quo; 
selective memory in fear of unrestrained consequences. "No, there was no accident in the nuclear pliant,, 
as far as we know everything is, time." This is not letting out the information, out of: fear of what will 
happen if that information gets out. 

I am using large examples, of this. In a human being, what that means is that, on the exalted side, there 
are things that are left behind that should be left behind because it is; healthier.. In the detriment, things 
are left behind that may not make! yaw healthier because they are left behind, but regardless, these are not 
people that should ever have post life therapy, they should not have hypnotism or rebirthing sessions.. 
They should not go through any of these things because what is left behind, what is forgotten, is 
important to leave forgotten far these people. 

In the white book: The power of the ego maintained through forgetting. Take the example of a 
salesperson. If you have to do a sales job and the last sales job you had, you were a failure and you were 
fired and you could not make your living, it is a good idea not to remember how bad all that was. It is a 
good idea just to put that aside and just see what will happen in the next job. In other words, for the 
strength of the ego, for these people, it is important that certain things are forgotten. 

The other side of this: The power of the ego maintained through selective memory. It is the selective 
memory that can be detrimental. These people forget things, i.e. they forget to tell you that there was a 
phone call because, in their imagination, that call might be disruptive for you and they don't want to be 
the source of that disruption. So they just selectively forget to tell you that there was this phone call from 
your banker, the police, or the doctor. In other words, this censorship works at many different levels. For 
the 26.4 person it is healthy to forget, but it is unhealthy for the others. Someone with the 26.4 makes you 
uncomfortable because you know that there is something they are not telling you. That is when the 44 
comes along and pulls it out, just like the 37 can pull it out of the 40. 

26.5 Adaptability 

What is often misunderstood about the 26 and the 40 is that they are enormously involved with other 
human beings. These are deep human-contact gates because the tribe is dependent on the ego. So these 
gates, because they are the only way for the tribe to get into that ego system, have to deal with all kinds of 
human and social pressures. Whenever I see someone who has the 26.5, I always say to them: "You 
know, you are made for Human Design." 

If there is a line of all the 384 lines that says that you should study Human Design, it is the fifth line of 
Adaptability. This is what the outside projects onto this capacity of the egoist. Here in this projection we 
have: The understanding of mechanics and the application of energy to achieve maximum potential. If 
you don't understand human beings, if you don't understand how things work, then you are not going to 
be able to properly manipulate the information and get it out. You have to know how people work. 

I had a job once where I had to make two hundred phone calls a day. It was in a newspaper office and I 
was in my early twenties. I had an old Dutch boss and he had made millions of dollars doing this job. He 
was training me because he intended to retire. He told me, "If you make two hundred calls a day, you are 
going to get twenty that say yes." By the way, if you make two hundred phone calls a day and you are the 
world's best salesperson, twenty will say "yes." The capacity is about being able to accept those one 
hundred eighty "no's". I have had so many phones slammed down on me, so many people say, "No, don't 
bother me." I did that for two years in my life. I probably spoke to half a million of people. I probably had 
four hundred ninety thousands of, "Go away, no." I made a lot of money. This is what the ego is all about: 
to understand the nature of human beings. When I pick up the telephone and I hear somebody's voice, I 
can tell you so much just when I hear their voice. 

Everything about the capacity to have influence on the tribe is the ability to understand the nature of 
human beings, how they work and what they need and how to satisfy those needs, how to explain to 
somebody what they need and that you can do it for them. 

Venus in detriment. A resistance and dissatisfaction when basic changes to nature are necessary. This is 
all about being forced to learn techniques. Remember that the fifth line gets projected on. Everybody 
says, "You can be great at this," but that does not mean that you have the tools that it takes. The tools that 
it takes are, that the moment that you step in there, you really have to understand other human beings. 

In the white book: The power of memory which maximizes the potential of the ego to attract others; and 
The resistance of the egoist to adaptation. The moment that these people that have to learn techniques 
have to change their technique, they are very uncomfortable. So the 26.5 in detriment, when they have to 
learn a new way of dealing with people or of doing their work, they are very uncomfortable; they really 
do not want to have to adapt to that. Understand mechanics. 

26.6 Authority 

The whole thing to recognize about the nature of the sixth line that is sitting on the roof is to look at what 
they meet in their next step, which is the 11.1 in this case. It is the gate of ideas and the first line is called 
Attunement. That first line of attunement is about the concept of being in the right place at the right time. 
One of the most frustrating things for the 26.6 is that it is trying to figure out exactly the right time and 
place because everything about the 26.6 is the recognition that the ego only gets respect through its 
correctness of action, only then can it truly be an authority. Here we have an overview line. It is a lifelong 
process. 

Authority The natural attainment of influence justified by the correctness of actions. What this represents 
is the legitimate ego. I have no problem with my ego in terms of being able to see that I have some kind 
of accomplishment in my life. The ego tends to be justified. This is all about the value of the ego as a 
motor, justified by the correctness of his action, that the ego in this doing is correct. If it works to the 
benefit of the community, to the material benefit of the 26, if it is correct, if they are in the right place at 
the right time, this is perfect. 

Well, you don't get it all the time. The 26.6, after trying when they are young to assert their ego and 
control others, they give up and they go and sit on the cosmic fence and they watch the movie, waiting for 
that possibility that perhaps there is a right place and that there is a right time to fulfill the potential of the 
tribe. 

The Sun exalted. The embodiment of reason and purpose that posses the test of time. This means that the 
ego has to be consistent; what it produces has to be of value. In the end, the ego is there to make sure that 
the tribe is healthy, that the tribe has enough to eat, that the tribe has shelter and all the other things that 
are part of the ego's responsibility in the tribal structure. 

The Moon in detriment attains Authority as a symbol and focus but not necessarily as a true embodiment. 
The constitutional monarch, stripped of real power but still the symbol of continuity of authority. These 
people are always separate and they can be very inspiring, ego-wise, yet they themselves don't do 
anything. They are still waiting for their opportunity to really be in the right place at the right time. 
Always remember in any kind of reading: when you come to a sixth line, don't expect it to act like the 
hexagram. It will do so when it is young because it has to learn, but it will not do so later. It will hold 
back. A sixth line sees the whole circuit. This 26.6 is looking at the whole tribal circuit which says: "I 
have to serve and protect the people." So, unless what it is doing is correct, unless it can end up being of 
service and being protective for the tribe, for the community, for those who are dependent, then there is 
nothing to do. "Why should I use my ego power to sell soap when it is not going to be productive and be 
of value to the community?" 

The strong ego whose influence is justified by the correctness of its actions; or The expression of the ego 
as a role whose influence is symbolic and lacks authority. Most 26.6's look like the detriment; very few 
live out the exaltation. Other ego people coming into contact with them, but particularly undefined egos 
are deeply impressed because they seem to have enormous ego power but seem to be unusually humble 
because they don't do anything with their ego. They don't feel like they have to push it out because there 
is no sense in doing that unless there is the right moment. 

Remember something about the ego motor: the ego motor will just stop working. It just will. It will take a 
break. In the 26.6, like in the 40.6, it can take a break for life. It steps out until it meets a 44.6 in its 
aloofness. The two of them will look at each other and say, "You are not involved either; maybe we 
should do something." The 26 is pointed to awareness whereas the 40 is just pointed towards emotions. 

HEXAGRAM 27 NOURISHMENT 

Looking at the sexual roles in the sacral center, our roles or strategies in forming union, we come to the 
27th hexagram, Nourishment. We come to the sexual role that we have in caring. This is quite different. 
On one side of the sacral, we have the reproductive capacity to be able to produce children and bring them 
into the world. When you come to the other side, to the channel of Preservation, this is about nourishing 
them, nurturing them, feeding them, allowing them to become healthy contributors in their society. 

You can see here that in the 27th hexagram, like in the 59th hexagram, each of these lines represent a 
role. Following the same process, line by line, that we have seen in the roles of the 59th hexagram, we see 
again the progression of how the lines work. 

In the first line, we see the role of self-provider and coveter, the one that can provide and the one that 
needs, the one that is strong and the one that is weak. The role of the second line is the role of the 
nourisher or the depleter, one who nourishes and one who takes away. The third line: the role of bonds 
made and broken. This consistency of the third line is always this trial and error. Here, the trial and error 
that takes place in caring. The fourth line: the fixedness that we saw in friendship on one side, the 
confident, or not. Here it is the benefactor and on the other side the dependant, the same process, but in 
the language that is applied to caring rather than a language that is applied to our sexuality. The fifth line, 
the universalization, nourishment as distribution or hoarding. Those that can put it out and those that 
constantly need to take it in at that level. And finally, the sixth line, the transition line, is all about trust. 
Can I trust caring? Is it worthwhile to care or not? 

The ultimate sixth line question is: "Is there anything that I can trust? And if so, what is it? And if it is 
true, prove it to me so that I can really know for sure that there is something that I can trust. " The question 
of the 59.6 is: "Can I trust this moment of being in love, or attracted?" The question of the 27.6 is: "Can I 
trust that caring is really beneficial and worthwhile? Can I trust this person to share in that union of 
caring?" Trust is a big question of the sixth line. 

Above the lines in the black book it says: The enhancement of the quality and the substance of all 
activities through caring. The quality of all activities is enhanced through caring. Caring is fundamental 
for any process and that is the nature of this hexagram: the enhancement of all activity through caring. 

27.1 Selfishness 

The first line always establishes a foundation. When we were dealing with the sixth line of the 3rd 
hexagram which is called Surrender, the very next hexagram is the 27.1. This line is called Selfishness. 

Think about what caring is all about. The foundation of caring is Selfishness and if you look at this line, it 
has the Sun exalted and the Earth in detriment. Whenever you see Sun/Earth together in the same line, 
you know that this line has enormous impact. It is speaking for one of the basic structures that we have: 
Sun above/Earth below. (The other lines with the Sun exalted and the Earth in detriment are: 8.2, 12.6, 
14.6, 15.2, 20.3, 23.4, 29.5, 31.1, 38.3, 40.6, and 48.4. There is one line with the Earth exalted and the 
Sun detriment: 9.3.) 

Here, the Sun exalted. The ego-driven first law of caring for oneself which is not necessarily at the 
expense of others. First lines have to know what it is to care. Caring begins at home. It begins with 
yourself; it begins with your own life. To care for yourself is to enhance the quality of your own life. This 
is where it begins. Selfishness is not bad. It is the foundation of caring. First you have to care for yourself. 

The Earth in detriment. Envy and its attendant misfortunes. In the white book: The power to care for 
oneself first. You cannot give to anyone unless you have looked after yourself first. One the other side, 
we have: The power of selfishness that is manifested through envy. "I cannot look after myself. I want 
somebody to look after me. I wish I could look after myself the way they do." 

You are always going to have the other side of this energy. We are a binary. Every single step along the 
genetic path goes into two different directions all the time. There are some of us who recognize 
intrinsically that we have to care for ourselves first and there are the others in our society who say, "I can't 
care for myself. Somebody has to care for me." This is the preemptive strike. This is weakness and 
strength. The strong ones can care for themselves and the weak ones cannot. 

27.2 Self-sufficiency 

The first line is aware of its capacity to care because it is looking inwards. When you get to the second 
line and you get to projection, it projects out that it cares. When I make certain kinds of statements, they 
sound very strong and they are not intended to be frightening but the reality is that the second line of the 
27 and all of the lines of the 27 but the second line particularly can lead to all kinds of disease and all 
kinds of health problems, all kinds of physical problems. All these things are rooted here in this 27th gate 
and the nature of caring. One of the things that are clear is that when caring is not evident, there are all 
kinds of atrophy that take place. If you have somebody who is dying and you have nobody who cares for 
them and there is nobody who imbues that caring in them, there is very little within that will hold on to 
the life process. Caring itself carries an enormous power with it: the power to enhance the quality of life. 

The second line does not really know whether it has the equipment to care and because of that, it is 
constantly projecting out the caring. When people first read this line, they think that it is wonderful. Self- 
sufciency. The obvious law that to give, one must have. But the second line does not know that. The first 
line does. 

The Moon exalted. The Mother. The great nourisher. These are nourishers who do not know how much 
they can nourish. Think about what that means: you have a certain amount of resources within you and 
there is somebody who is tapping into those resources and if you are a second line, you don't know how 
far you can go. In other words, you can end up emptying out all your resources until you get found out, 
like all second lines, and you collapse because you have been depleted and you are sick. 
Remember that the 27 is directly pointing towards our immune system and our health system. This is the 
nourishment of our immune system and, without proper caring, our immune system does not work 
properly. So, in this second line where there is this projection outwards, there is no sense of how much I 
can give; nor is there, in the detriment, any sense of how much I can take. 

The 27.2 in the detriment is: Weakness that can sap the strength and power of others. These are people 
who are projecting out their need for caring and they are constantly pulling in. This is the child that 
constantly keeps on demanding his mother's breast, whether that child needs to be fed or not. It is 
constantly demanding until the mother gets a breast infection and ends up with all kinds of pain and there 
is no more milk available for the child. Nature steps in at some point and says, "Wait a minute," but it 
steps in with the mother being sick. 

The reality is that when you are dealing with the second line of the 27, there is something to be aware of: 
These people do not have any sense of what the limit is. That is true of all second lines. That is why they 
end up in those situations of getting caught. By the way, we live in a time now where we have the great 
veiling planet of Neptune sitting in the 60th gate, the gate of limitation. There are all kinds of people who 
do not know where their limitations are right now. In the same way, they do not know how many 

resources they have. They do not know necessarily how far they can go because the whole business of 
where the boundaries are suddenly is covered by this veil. 

This is the way the second line operates here. In this second line, because it is so important, this is caring, 
this is enhancement. Because it is such an important dominant field in the tribe, it leads to all kinds of 
problems because you have people that are being sucked out and you have people that are just doing all 
that sucking in. Both of them can become very unhealthy. 

Next thing, now that I have said that, is do not take a moralistic judgment: "Oh, boy, they have the 27.2." 
It is so important to understand that it is necessary for us to go through all these processes. Each and 
every one of them has their value. If you are somebody who is getting succor from the nourishing mother, 
it can be quite wonderful and that caring can be marvelous. It may be hell for the nourishing mother but it 
can be wonderful for the recipient who says, "Yes, she died, but she was great. She looked after me. She 
made my life possible." There is always the other side of all these things. Don't bring your judgments in. 

27.3 Greed 

When we get to the third line, bonds made and broken, this whole process of trial and error, this line is 
called Greed. When people see that, they get upset. Everything about the 27th hexagram is about living a 
better quality of life. That is why you have the cliche of parents who say, "I will make the world better for 
my children than it was for me." They are going to enhance the quality of life. 

The third line, because it is a trial and error line and because it is all about adaptation, is trying to figure 
out how you have the right kind of caring so that you can get the right kind of enhancement in your life. 
Because they are looking for this enhancement, they will go through trial and error; they go through what 
appears to be an obsessive kind of process to try to find the right caring. They are constantly breaking the 
bonds of the caring because they keep on looking for what will really enhance the quality of their life. 

Please understand that life is a very difficult thing. We all know that. Caring enhances the quality of our 
process and makes it easier for us to live with the ordeal. Every human being needs somebody who is 
going to care about them and about what happens to them because it helps bring about an enhancement of 
the quality of their life. We are not here alone. This channel is deeply altruistic. It is not about finding 
enhancement for oneself but to provide that to the tribe through the law that is on the other side of this in 
the 50th gate. 

71he obsession with having much more than one needs. Literally, it is not enough that II know about this 
coring. Is there someitlniirng that can make my life even better and enhance it even more? That is the 
other side of this. 

Pluto exalted. Here, the psychological manifestation. The obsession and dependency on ,knowing what is 
hidden. The secret policeman. This is Sigmund Freud's line. In the white book: The power derived 
fromhavingmore than one needs, whether sexually, mentally or materially. Remember that it is 'more' in 
the sense of caring more sand having ,a better quality dfllilfe. It is all -about enhancement and, in the end, 
what the first three lines don't iunderstand is that on the other side there is the law (floe 50). Caring has to 
submit to the law because the (law controls the frequency and the law controls the awareness. 

The caring that is corning out of the 27 is just a genetic rdle. "I mood -to care about all these things. If I 
don't, I wiil not have a better life. I need to, even to the paint that I will go around secretly and find out all 
of these things." 

On the other side df -this: The lust for power to get more than one needs. By the way, it also has the 
dbvious value of wanting more and more caring, but it is not-the same as the second line. The second lime 
wants more and more from tine very same person, as an example. The third line wants more from you and 
more -from the next one and the one after that one. It is a different process. 

If you look at the second, the third and the fourth line, they all have Mars in detriment and one of the 
things that are clear to me is that Mars is a great disease initiator. Mars can always initiate illness out of 
its immature energy. When you look at this third line in the black book and you look at the Mars in 
detriment: Mundane and wholly without redeeming value, greed, a lust that inevitably cripples and 
addicts. The reality is that within this bonds being made and broken and looking for the enhancement in 
life, there is also the reality that you may not find it and then you become addicted to finding the kind of 
caring and the kind of knowledge you need to allow you to care, the kind of thing that will make you feel 
better, the kind of thing that will allow you to feel good in caring. 

These are people that become addicted to all kinds of things: to drugs, to certain kinds of situations, and 
they can be crippled by that, unable to care for themselves, deeply depressed because they cannot find the 
enhancement in life. They cannot see how they can take their ordinary life and give it a quality that allows 
them to feel good about what it is to be alive. That is what caring is for. Though the third line, unlike the 
second line, does not lead directly to sickness, the result is that the third line in its detriment will lead 
indirectly to illness. The moment that there is this inability to see that life can be okay, that there can be 
this better quality in life, there is this obsession with trying to find out how you can make it better. If you 
take a look at Freud (I mentioned his name as part of that, he has the exalted, fixed), you can see that: to 
seek out obsessively, to understand everything that was hidden underneath in order to find out how to 
care. You find it out through trial and error, through adaptation, and only at that point where you can find 
that out can you begin to work with that process. 

The people who have the detriment do not have a way of finding out what they need to know and they do 
not really have a focus for finding out what they need to know. They keep going from one thing to the 
next, waiting for that moment where they find it. In that, it can lead to all kinds of physical problems in 
their life. 

27.4 Generosity 

Just like the fourth line of the 59, when you get to the upper trigram here, you are dealing with channels 
that are really about our connection with others, about our intimacy with others, our nourishing of others 
and yet, in the first three lines there is really an inability to understand what the other is all about. In this 
case, the other is the 50th hexagram, the establishment of what the values are. It is the establishment of 
what the law is. When you get to the fourth line, it knows that there is something else at the other end. It 
knows that there are values over there and that there is awareness over there. It recognizes that what it has 
to offer is that it has this power of enhancement to offer, caring. It can offer this. 

This is the line of Generosity. The natural sharing of attained abundance. Please understand that. It goes 
back to the first line, to its resonance that says, "First you have to look after yourself, and then you can 
give." When you get to the fourth line, it talks about the sharing of abundance. This is not somebody who 
can be depleted. This is somebody who can only give once the abundance is there and attained, and then 
they are ready to share that energy. 

Jupiter exalted. Magnanimous and qualitative sharing. The gift of rewarding those who are deserving. But 
they are very focused. What these people are focused on is, "I have to care." That is their whole trip. 
Everything else is put aside. They have to care. 

When you get to Mars in detriment, you get to this third example of the impact that Mars can have on us 
in terms of destabilizing our well-being. Remember that this is a gate that is opening up to the immune 
system. Mars in detriment. Indiscriminate sharing. That is going to bring the wrong people into your life. 
The wrong people coming into your life can make you sick. 

There are three kinds of illnesses that are rooted here. In the second line, that illness is built right in 
through not recognizing what the barriers are. When you get to the third line, the illness is secondary. It 
comes from the ordeal of trying to find the right quality of life and stumbling along the way and, when 
you stumble, you can really get hurt and ill. When you come to this fourth line, it is about bringing the 
wrong people into your life. This brings disease into your life. This line is notorious for sexual 
transmission. Somebody comes into your life and they give you gonorrhea. This is about bringing the 
wrong people into your life through indiscriminate sharing. Just because you can care does not mean that 
you have to care for everyone. This is the Martian side, the immaturity in caring. 

In the white book: The power and strength to share generously; or The potential loss of sharing through 
indiscriminate sharing. Bring the wrong people into your life and those people make you sick. 

I am involved with in a long term project which is called 'The Global Incarnation Index' and it has to do 
with our incarnating crosses that we come in on. The 27th hexagram is part of a cross that is called the 
cross of The Unexpected and the 27.4 is one of the great classic lines of the unexpected. Many years ago, 
Martin Grassinger made some charts for me of the discovery of Pluto, Uranus and Neptune. In all those 
cases, the Nodes were in 27.4 and 28.4. When the comet 'Shoemaker Levy' banged into Jupiter, the Nodes 
were in 27.4/28.4. 

If you look at charts of people who carry this energy, they are always capable of releasing the unexpected, 
which is both positive and wonderful and horribly frightening in this line. You can get the unexpected 
gonorrhea; you can also get the unexpected caring. All of a sudden, there is somebody there who really 
cares and is offering you that caring. "I did not know that you cared. Really?" It is suddenly out of 
nowhere. The unexpected is always part of this process. 

27.5 The Executor 

When you start with the first line, it tells you about the essence. We saw that the essence is about looking 
after oneself, and when you get to the fifth line, you get to the way the world projects on that. The world 
projects on the 27 as the executor. Someone who is carrying the 27.5 has someone on the other side 
saying, "They care. I know that they care." This projection is going onto them. They may, or they may 
not. In the same way that you can project on the 59.5 that that is somebody you can love but you don't 
know whether they are going to love you back, here is somebody that you project on that they really care 
but you don't know if they really do. You don't know because it is a projection. 

The Executor. The ability to distribute effectively the resources of others. This is what caring is about for 
the mythology of our planet. Caring is about somebody who takes the responsibility to make sure that 
others are nurtured properly. That is what caring is supposed to be all about. 

Jupiter exalted. Either the gifted and principled agent of distribution or the good sense and ability to find 
one. "Yes, I know that you think that I really care but that is not something I can care about. I'll send you 
to somebody who will care about that." The doctor who is an eye specialist sends you to a nose specialist 
saying, "That is not my field, but they care for you over there." 

On the other side, Saturn in detriment. A restrictive nature that hampers distribution or the seeking of 
advice and assistance. Again, this is the concept of the paper tiger. This is somebody who is projected on 
that they can really care, but they themselves know that they don't. That does not come out. 

In the white book: The power and strength to care for the resources of others, or Weakness and the risk of 
loss of power restrict caring. They will lose their power if it is shown that they cannot really care or if 
they cannot really be the executor. One of the things you see, just like the love of the Casanova gigolo 
that has become themes in literature, so is the executor who doesn't care about you and puts the money in 
their pocket. We have all kinds of stories running around about, "Yes, I trusted this person to look after 
my interests." They look after their own interests and then they go to jail because the law catches up with 
them, telling them, "You were supposed to look after that person's money and you put it all in your own 
pocket," and they lose their power in the end. 

I remember this great story in New York City about a day care center. There was this day care center 
which was supposed to look after children and the people who were running this center were starving the 
children so that they could make money from the food. They were starving the children. Typical of the 
27.5: you project on them, "They really care." It is called 'being taken for a ride.' The 59.5 and 27.5 are 
really capable of taking you for a ride because you are projecting on them and you don't get to see what is 
really there. By the way, in putting it this way, also understand that they are the universalizing agents. 
They may in fact be great executors, but like everything having to do with anything, you can't go in 
blindly. It is not just a projection field that you can accept and believe. 

27.6 Wariness 

When we come to the sixth line, we come to Wariness. Again, this is a transition line. It is the end of the 
process. This line says: A protection against an abuse of generosity. 

The Moon exalted. A practical and realistic approach to nurturing, whose appropriateness is guided by 
feelings and instinct. Pluto in detriment. A tendency to be overly suspicious. 

Whenever you are looking at the 27.6, there is only one thing that can really stand out there which is that 
the whole thing about this process is: Can you trust, or not? It is all about trust. It is all about seeing 
whether caring is of any value, if it is really having its proper effect. Is it going to work properly? Is it 
going to enhance the quality of life? The 27th hexagram goes to the 50th hexagram which carries all of 
the basic frequencies of awareness that occupies our whole process. In other words, coming out of that is 
a basic fundamental question which is, "Can I trust anything in this life process? Can I trust caring? Can I 
trust the law? Can I trust awareness? Can I trust what I am taking in?" 

In the white book: The power and strength to be realistic in one's capacities to care and nurture. That 
realism can be very intense. It can be so intense that it is saying, "All right, I am looking at that but if I 
care for you, what will that do to the quality of life for all of this?" So often the only thing that people 
with the 27.6 can care about are very broad, almost idealistic things, where they see that there is really 
something worthwhile in caring about that. You cannot go to these people and say, "We have all these 
starving babies in Africa, could you give me ten bucks." If you try to get ten dollars from the 27.6, that is 
not so easy. "Well, yes. I know. But if I give you this money, out of those ten dollars, seven will go to 
administration, two dollars go to taxes and three cents will go to the baby that is dying in Gabon. No, 
thank you. I won't do that. I don't trust you and I don't trust that this caring will manifest in the world. I 
don't think that it is of any value." 

The whole thing about the sixth line is that it is looking for the awareness to confirm for it, to establish in 
law, that if we do care, it is going to be productive. It is like all of these agencies over the last few years 

that are involved in humanitarian causes. The first thing they realized is that by the time that they get their 
stuff on the ground somewhere, there are people stealing it. There are people making money from it. 
There are all kinds of stuff going on. 

The sixth line looking at the law on the other side says, "Okay, when I can care and I know that my caring 
is actually going to enhance the quality of life, then I'll care. If you say to me that I can give those ten 
dollars directly to that child, I will do that. But I will not give it three cents so that you can make your 
living off it and I don't trust you. You do not really care. You only care for yourself." 

The sixth line is always going beyond and it sets a standard here because this is the energy for the basic 
process of our awareness. It says, "Is there anything to trust?" and only in the moment that you begin to 
recognize that there are things that you can trust can you begin to care. 

I know this so intimately in my work. I deal with people who do not know themselves, and in the nature 
of our work, in the nature of doing an analysis, I bring them to what is reliable in them, what is consistent, 
what is in that sense trustworthy. The moment that they can see what is reliable and trustworthy, they can 
begin to care for themselves again because the disease of the world is self-hatred and self-suspicion. 
There is sickness in all the lines of the 27. The deepest sickness here, in the 27.6, is the thing that says, "I 
don't trust anything and because of that I can't really care about anything. " 

I lived my life with the 20.6 which is the line of Wisdom. I never trusted any of my knowing. Knowing 
was never enough for me. I was very smart. I knew a lot of things but I did not trust any of it because I 
knew that if I can say this, I can also say that. There was nothing to trust. When I went through my 
mystical experience and I was given an absolute in the sense of the Maya and I could see that this 
absolute was consistent, it gave me something to really care about. It gave me something to care about 
that I'd never cared about in my life: you, people, other human beings, that they can be informed. I was 
never interested in doing that other than from the moment that I could see that it was worth caring about. 
All sixth lines are like that. I am very lucky. I get to do that in my lifetime: to live out the value of the 
sixth line. Not everybody gets to that point and it is very important to understand that. The moment that 
you get to a sixth line, no matter where it is, this question comes up: "Shall I really commit myself? Is it 
really worthwhile? Can I trust this process? Will it take me where I want to go?" This is always the case. 
So whenever you see sixth lines, do not jump to any conclusion about that line coming out. It may never 
come out until there is really something that one can trust in, worth caring about as a value. 

HEXAGRAM 28 PREPONDERANCE OF THE GREAT 

Here, we move to the individual process and we stay with awareness as potential. Rather than taking you 
through the natural stream of all of these potential gates, that is, rather than going from the 32 to the 44, 
which I leave to you in your own process, I want to show you the harmonies that exist, not simply line for 
line throughout but to recognize that all three of these potentials (the 32, the 28 and the 1 8) are doing the 
same job. They are just doing it differently. We have looked at the instinctive potential in the 32. Now we 
come to the channel 28/38, to the channel of Struggle, to a design of Stubbornness. 

Wte come to the 28th gate, The Preponderance of the Great, the gate of the game Player. The potential is 
the awareness to struggle, or not. Individuality is acoustic, so it is literally the ability to respond 
acoustically and, in that response, we have the awareness whether to struggle or not. Not the awareness to 
transform or not. Because this is spontaneous, it is taking place existentially, in the now. The awareness 
potential is the stubbornness to listen, to make sure that one listens so that one can take the best possible 
risks. 

This is all about risk taking. The 28th gate represents a primal fear in us: the fear of death. That fear is to 
be understood as a fear of whether or not life is of value. Just as the 32 is afraid that their work in this life 
will be a failure, the 28 is afraid that their way in this life will be a failure, that is, that they themselves, 
their lives and what they live for is not really worthwhile. This is one of the deepest themes of 
individuality: to see whether life is really of value or not, and this is rooted here in the 28th gate. 

In the heading of the 32nd gate we find that the only thing which endures is change. When we come to the 
heading of the 28th hexagram, it says: The transitoriness of power and influence. It is the same thing. It is 
all about change and evolution. It is an ongoing process. The transitoriness of power and influence is what 
the Preponderance of the Great is all about. 

28.1 Preparation 

We know that the nature of the first line is introspective. It is looking inward and the first line in the 28 is 
called Preparation. The desire to be effective manifested in the application of energy to detail. If you look 
at the 32.1, it says: A life sustaining respect and attention to all aspects of a process. We are talking about 
the same process; the only thing is that this is individual. The change that has to be endured in the 32 is 
tribal. It is all about support. It is all about the tribe. 

This is an individual process where we have Venus in detriment. The aesthetic appreciation of planning 
that may have no real application. In other words, wonderful detail but nowhere to go. The intuition to 
potentially apply energy to detail; or An intuition for detail without the potential for application. It is all 
about being prepared. 

This is the gate of game player and the risk taker. The first line has to set the foundation for that. What 
kind of risk do you want to take? You'd better have your detail. What often happens is that what looks 
like a detriment isn't one at all. What that means is that you go through all the detail and then you don't 
take the risk due to what you see. It was just interesting to go through all the detail. This is all about 
preparation. Make sure that you have the detail before you take the risk. That is what the Preponderance 
of the Great is all about. The foundation is: you better have the detail. Which means, as you move 
through, the detail is always there. Risk taking is not a blind thing. 

28.2 Shaking hands with the Devil 

The first line is trying to figure out the odds in introspection. The second line only wants to win and does 
not care what the odds are. Shaking hands with the devil: you are only interested in winning. When you 
look at initiation which is part of the individual process, this deep competitiveness that lies within the 
individual nature is mirrored in this second line: the projection that "I have to win. If I do not win and if I 
can't take a risk and gamble, life is not worthwhile." This can lead to depression. This line is about 
Distasteful alliance. 

Sun exalted. A means, however unsavory, that is justified by is end. Jupiter in detriment. The anxiety 
engendered by sacrificing higher principles when there is no guarantee of success. In the white book: 
When the game turns to a struggle, the intuitive acceptance of any alliance in order to win. The other side: 
The risk in sacrificing principles when there is no guarantee of victory. 

The whole nature of struggle is all about winning and losing. There are people that are either very good 
winners or very bad losers, or the other way around. All of that can lead them to be very uncomfortable 
with themselves. Remember, the deep fear which lies underneath, this fear of whether life is really of 
value or not. These people will risk anything to get what they think is the projected victory. Realize the 
illusion of that. They are projecting, "If I win this, life will be great." Then they discover that they have 
sold their soul to the devil. By the way, for them it is okay. You have to see that. If you have the second 
line, that is what it is about for you. 

Anybody with this second line has to recognize that they do not have all the details. Therefore, the 
winning and losing is important to them for their learning process. This is the child that has to learn, "You 
have to be a good loser. Do not get angry just because you have lost." This is a process that they have to 
go through because the detail is not there and they are just projecting it out. 

28.3 Adventurism 

We reach the end of the lower trigram process and find the capacity to adapt. Details are available: the 
details are always necessary for the risk taker to know what to struggle about because not everything is 
worth winning. This is what the second line does not know. The third line knows that not everything is 
worth winning and not everything can be won, but it is Adventurism. This is the first attempt to really be 
able to fulfill the whole struggle to go across the channel. 

Unfounded risk taking. Saturn exalted. A basic conservatism that even in its adventurous acts is 
necessarily prudent. In other words, there is a carefulness built into the third line. It is not so quick to just 
project outwards. It is not just waiting and adding up all the odds and ends and the detail. 

The Jupiterian side: Here a perverse manriestation of Jupiter's expansiveness, where risk.taking is 
rationalized and failure ensurred. Without prudence, without relpedting the detail side (the projecting 
capacity is there), there is always going to be failure. Failure in this context means that even if you win, it 
won't make life seem more worthwhile. That is the failure here. 

In the white book: An intuitive caution in risk-taking in times of struggle, or Intuitive rationalizing of risk 
taking in times of struggle. One cannot just simply jump in because you ado not know what you will get, 
and you do not (know whether iit is worthwhile for you. This is the lesson that the three has to learn from 
the two. 

The whole thing for the 28th agate is that the moment-they see that what'they are: struggling for is 
worthvvlhiie,, this is their whole story. If it is really -worthwhile for them, it its a wonderful process no 
matter how hard tie struggle is to get there (because it is justified in the end. They get a sweet victory, inot 
-the sour victory of taking -a risk because What -you are trying to win in this game is not the prime. It is 
the sense of accomplishment, that to be individual in this (life is really worthwJhile. "It is great to The 

alive. It its nice to be a human being. I enjoy my life." That is the real victory that is being sought out 
here. 

28.4 Holding on 

With the fourth line we reach the upper trigram. The 28.4 is a very unusual line as it is part of the cross of 
The Unexpected, and therefore, very unexpected things come out of this line. All fourth lines, due to their 
nature of externalization and due to their one-trackedness, are very focused on one aspect. 

Here it is called: Holding on. The ability through whatever means to keep one's grip. These people hold 
on to their struggle and nothing can pull them from that. They are very one-track in their struggle. No 
matter what the struggle is, no matter what they have to go through in their drive to externalize, they can 
really hold it together. 

Jupiter exalted. The application of knowledge to exploit opportunities, and usually for the greater good. 
The Mercurial side: The application of intelligence to hold on, exclusively out of self-interest. That is 
being individual in the first place. That is hardly a detriment in the normal sense of the word because that 
is the individual process. 

A depth of intuition at its best in struggle and often of value to others. If I want somebody who will help 
me in a struggle with someone or about something, I will look for a 28.4. They are very good at that. This 
is their nature. They can really be in there and get into that energy. 

A depth of intuition that is stubbornly selfish in its capacity to hold on. They will not work with me. They 
are in their own thing. They have to deal with their struggle. The people with the 28.4 can be infuriating if 
you do not understand their nature because they get fixed and obsessed with their particular struggle. It 
has to do with a certain thing for them. Everything about the 28, in the end, is about winning, like 
everything about the 32 has to do with succeeding ("Do not fail."). 

Here you have to win, but the winning is about winning for yourself in the sense that your life is 
worthwhile. It is hard to kill these people. There is a deep focus here on holding on in the struggle until 
their very last breath in order to figure out, "Yes, it was worthwhile." Then they get the joke and die. The 
joke is that the game is fixed. 

28.5 Treachery 

The universalization line of the 28 is called Treachery. It has a wicked name but it is not wicked at all. 
Their job is to universalize struggle. Their job is to get everybody to struggle for the value of life. At the 
highest level, if you look at the highest principles, that is what these people do. They get other people to 
struggle in order to find out for themselves that life is worthwhile. They provoke them in that sense. 

The abuse of trust. The manipulation of the collective that, while pitting one faction against the other, 
does not directly support or reject either. This is not about winning or losing. This is about making sure 
that everybody is in the game. Please understand that. That is very important. This is a universalizing 
element about dealing with the fear of death. They deal with this fear by getting everybody in the game to 
struggle about whether life is worthwhile. Somebody with the 28.5 probes somebody else with, "Is your 
life really worthwhile? Are you really doing what you want to do?" They get them all cranked up. They, 
themselves, do not care. They just want everybody to play the game. They want everybody to be in the 
same struggle. They are hoping at least if they get it, maybe I'll get it too. 

The other side is classic: Sun in detriment. The breaking of alliances with trusted forces to align with 
more powerful forces, and the attendant destabilization of the whole. This is what they are best at. For 
example, they go to Osho and come back and say, "Oh, my Master is full of light." Then somebody tells 
them about another master and they will join that one. They stop being a sannyasin. They keep on 
changing their masters. Every time that they leave, the people they leave are saying, "Treachery. These 
are bad people who can't be trusted." This is not true. For this line, the struggle is endless. If you have 
struggle in life, you will have it until you die. 

These people recognize that it is an ongoing process. They surrender to it in that sense. They have one 
teacher and they think that he is wonderful and when somebody tells them that there is a better teacher, 
that is where they go because they are trying to get to the point where they find something that really 
shows them that life is worthwhile, and they will continue to take that risk. They leave behind a lot of 
struggle. The person that they leave behind who was depending on them says, "Why did they go?" They 
have the struggle now. "Is life really worthwhile because they are gone?" This is what they do. They are 
great disturbers. They just move this out into the world. Everybody struggles together. 

28.6 Blaze of Glory 

We come to the roof of the house and we come to Blaze of Glory. Again, the thing to recognize about this 
sixth line is that is does not want to have anything to do with struggle. Nothing. It wants to get to the 44th 
hexagram, to the first line which is called: The establishment of frameworks as a result of interaction. It 
wants to establish a mastery over the collective. It wants to go to something else. It wants to go far 
beyond the struggle. It can only go there if life is worthwhile. 

Sacrifice rather than capitulation to the law of deterioration. No matter what it takes, I will not keep on 
sliding down in the hopelessness of not finding that life is worthwhile. I will start taking any kind of risk. 
I will make any kind of sacrifice. I will stop eating until I die, just to see if it is worthwhile. 

Pluto exalted. Regeneration and renewal no matter what the price. Neptune in detriment. Self-destruction. 
That is something that had a deep impact on a whole generation of people. So many people were born 
with this configuration with either Pluto or Neptune. (1958-1960). 

In the white book: The deep intuitive drive to win, no matter what the cost. The other side: The deep 
intuitive fear of defeat and a potentially profound hopelessness in times of struggle. Remember that the 
victory and the loss have to do 

with whether life is worthwhile. These people work too much, live too fast, drive too fast. They take a 
little too many drugs. They are always pushing it to see whether or not life can really be worthwhile. 
Many of them are pushed to the point of destruction. Literally, these people make themselves sick over a 
lifetime. They just slowly burn themselves out because they cannot find this sense that "It is okay, life is 
worthwhile." 

The 28 is only potential. V% have not looked at the possibility of awareness that comes out of that 
potential. The potential to find out whether life is worthwhile takes the 57th and the 20th gate to bring the 
awareness to the throat and manifest it in the now so that the 28.6 can see, "Being here in the now, life IS. 
It just is. I do not have to be afraid of it because it is there." If the 28.6 is hanging there by itself, it can be 
very uncomfortable because one does not want to struggle. One simply wants to know that life is 
worthwhile. These are people who, instead of struggling, just hurt themselves. 

HEXAGRAM 29 THE ABYSMAL 

The 29th hexagram is something very strange, because it says either yes or no to life. It is making the 
commitment to be alive as a human. It is built into it at its deepest level to say yes. My joke with this is: 
"Can I borrow your life?" "Yes." "Can I waste your time?" "Yes." "Can I take all your money?" "Yes." 
"Can I fuck you up?" "Yes." 

It is built into our sacral center to be alive. The 29th gate is constantly reaffirming our commitment to life. 
It is the deep within the deep. It is our commitment to life but at the same time, it is the thing that is going 
to turn off the switch when we die. It is the thing that is going to say, "Enough. I have had enough now. I 
will say no now." I am always telling people who have the 29th gate don't say "Yes," say "Wait". Make 
people wait. The reality is that the yes is built in, but the no can always be there. 

Above the lines: The deep within the deep. Persistence despite difficulties has its inevitable rewards. This 
is a very funny language: Persistence despite difficulties... If you say yes to life, you are saying yes to 
difficulties. This is one of the jokes about being human.. ..has its inevitable rewards. When? 'Inevitable' 
simply means that at some point they come, but when they come? You can go through difficulty after 
difficulty after difficulty and you are constantly saying yes to life and all the difficulties are there. 

What are hidden in this 29 can be the deepest scars in humans. There is no line in here that talks about 
self-destruction or killing oneself but everything within the 29 has the potential for suicide. It has the 
potential to say no to the life process. It has the potential to say no to healing, no to being cured, no to 
being helped, no to being wanted. All of those things are always possible underneath, and it depends on 
whether or not they have in the earliest part of their life accepted for themselves the difficuly of what life 
is. 

29.1 The Draftee 

The first lime says: The Draftee. The foundation of this hexagram is:: The ability to adapt to. struggle 
when necessary but not as a permanent state, hother words, make your commitment but don't make 
thatcommitmemt for life. Make your cornmitmemi o the experience, just to the experience. It is; the! 
experience that gives us the ultimate growth andlvalue in the. process. That is why' when people are really 
doown, if they find something that they really like th do, that-they can commit themselves to, suddenly 
they begin to blossom, gut without that, without being drafted into the experience they simply continue to 
go through their process saying, "Can I really continue to say yes to this commitment to life?" 

Mars exalted. The innate nature to apply energy in times of war and peace. Bless young Mars. Mars says, 
"Yes, I don't care how difficult it is. I have the energy and the power and I will do it." That is Mars at its 
best. "I am here to be alive. I am here to grow up," says the child Mars. "Give me a chance to grow up." 

The whole thing about the 29 is to understand that the experiential way, like any way, takes time. 
Everything takes time. To be well in this life, to be at peace in this life, to come to grips with what it is to 
be you in this life, it all takes time. That is what I tell people when they come to Design. You have to 
work with this awareness and knowledge for seven years before it really is going to be a part of you. Just 
so it can get down to the cells. Just so you can continue that process. 

Neptune in detriment. The great mask of Neptune is dropping in here. A deep impressionability whose 
mark from times of struggle may make a return to normal conditions extremely difficult. When you have 
a child that has the 29.1, it will either go one way or the other. They are either going to have this 
wonderful depth of energy to say, "Yes, it is difficult but life is life. Yes, the experience is hard but I'll go 
through it," or the other side in which the experience comes and they are shattered in it. In that moment of 

shattering in the experience, it becomes more and more difficult for them to commit themselves again to a 
new experience. The child falls into a pool, unable to swim, and it is a 29.1. The deep within the deep. If 
the child pulls itself up and it can, that child is always going to be able to fall into a pool of water. But for 
the child that has to be grabbed by somebody else and dragged out of that pool gasping, it is going to take 
a lifetime for that being to go back into the water. 

This is the nature of commitment. Commitment is not just about saying yes. It is about recognizing that 
whatever you say yes to is going to present all those difficulties and the moment you get stuck on the 
difficulties is the moment that you loose this magical Martian love and lust for life. That is the beauty that 
can lie here, but this is also the pain that can be on the other side. 

In the white book: The power to persevere when necessary but not generally; and the detriment: 
Hesitation in making commitments based on past experience. "No, I don't want to try that. I can't do that. 
"Come on, you can." "No." 

29.2 Assessment 

The first line has the capacity for introspection and recognizes that it can say yes and make a 
commitment. '. have seen that this commitment can lead to a continuing process of growth; after all, this 
is the channel of Discovery, a channel of succeeding where other people fail, or failing where other 
people succeed. This is one of those things to keep in mind about the nature of that commitment. 

When you come to the second line and you are coming to the projection, these people are projecting out 
that they are always ready to say yes. "Come and ask me. I am ready to say yes." Persistence tempered by 
caution. The caution is that we are dealing with the lack of introspection because it is projection; so, 
although the capacity is there to project out that they are ready to be persistent and that they have the 
power to be persistent, they do not really know whether that power is there. The caution is not a mental 
caution. It is not an awareness caution that says, "Aha, I have to be careful about where I put my energy." 
This is just power. 

The Sun exalted. The power of sustainment as a guiding light. In the white book: Saying yes and the 
power to persevere. This power is really there. These people project out that they are ready to persevere 
but they don't know whether they can or not. It may not work for them. They may be found out. They 
may not have the necessary resources to persist in that particular experience, whatever it may be. 

Venus in detriment. A tendency to over-cautiousness when persistence is perceived as adding to rather 
than ending disharmony. Here comes Venus again, stepping in with this additional interactive social 
quality and making the process more difficult by being there. Somebody comes up to the 29.2 and says, 
"Do you want to try roller-blading?" and they say, "Yes." They are always ready to say yes. They will 
always project out their yes and then somebody who is close to them says, "Yeah, but that costs a lot of 
money and people get broken legs and it does not really work and I do not really want you to do that 
around here." 

If that is somebody who is important for them that they want to have as their friend, or somebody with 
whom they want to have a harmonious relationship, they are likely to be much more cautious and 
restrained in that. In other words, they get found out because they discover in the moment that somebody 
makes a comment about it and they do not really know if they have the resources. They can suddenly 
become cautious about that. 

Always built into all of the lines of the 29 is this holding back from making the commitment, but usually 
it is the product of having had a difficult experience in life that does it, rather than commonsense or rather 

than awareness that says, "Yes, I have to be careful about how I use my energy and what I commit it to." 
The caution in people who say yes comes from people who got burnt. 

Water does not like fire. These people can always get burnt from the experience. They can always suffer 
from the experience and say, "I can't do that anymore. I can't take those kinds of chances anymore. I can't 
commit myself to those kinds of things anymore." They become more cautious, but not because they are 
aware. The difficulty of the experience is something that becomes a burden for them because they don't 
know whether they have the resources for it. 

29.3 Evaluation 

When you come to Evaluation, the third line: In this context, properly assessed inaction. By the way, 
properly assessed inaction does not mean that that is how they start their life. They have to learn that from 
experience. They are going to be less likely to jump in and say yes but nonetheless, they will. They have 
to learn from experience so that genetic attribute of them can be triggered properly. 

Despite the urge and cost of inaction, the knowledge that it is sometimes better to fight another day. You 
have to learn that sometimes it is better to fight another day, but not necessarily. These people will make 
their mistakes. They have to go through that process. 

The power to wait. You see Mars there. You have to wait until Mars is about 40 years old. Mars has to 
grow up in order to wait. I am an Arian. I know that. 

On the other side of this in the black book is Jupiter in detriment. A preference for withdrawal in principle 
with little regard for effect. When the mistakes have really been heavy, there is this "Wait a minute now. 
Shall I do this?" For so long I taught you to really just see this mechanism of saying yes, because that is 
how it operates at the mundane level. At the mundane level, people will always go through this process 
because the fact is that you have to go through that process if you have this gate. But you will always 
meet the difficulties of life and in meeting them, there are only two ways to go. 

This is the deep within the deep. What is at the other end? The other end is the love of the body, the 46th 
gate. The magic of this_channel, the 46/29, is to discover the magic of what it is to be in form, what it is 
to be in a body in this life and what it means for this body to move through this life. This channel can be 
deeply profound because of that and because this is the love of being alive in the body and that is what all 
this commitment is about: to be committed to the life process. But you don't know because on the other 
end, the 46, Pushing Upward, is in the kingdom of heaven. In the old I'Ching, you have to come from The 
deep within the deep and you have to go through all this stuff until you finally get up to the kingdom of 
heaven and you discover, "Wow. This machine is really great." 

Not everybody gets to that place and it is not because of this line or anything else. It is about the nature of 
what it is to be human, and to be unaware. If you are human and unaware, you do not like yourself and 
you dislike the wrong person because it is not you that you do not like but your conditioning and what 
you have become. You do not get a chance to see the magnificence of that. Everybody who stands in front 
of a mirror has a complaint about the nature of their form. We do not accept the magnificence of what that 
is. We complain about it. We would like to get out of it. I have so many people who come up to me and 
say, "I astral-project. I live here in my body in this life." 

This is the magic of the 29th gate. Until you can accept the beauty of what it is to be in form, there is no 
experience in life that is worth having because otherwise it is just pain and difficulty and a struggle. It is 
the work of life, this tough, heavy world. We are lucky people. We are privileged to live in a society 
where there is wealth and relative freedom. The world is filled with horrors. Yet at the same time, we still 

have this "Well, I need to fix this. I have to make this or that better. I don't like what I see." This is loving 
what it is to be in these bodies. They are beautiful. For me, Buddha was crazy. All he wanted to do was to 
get rid of the body and get out of it. This is where we belong. This is what the 29 has to come to 
recognize: "Aha, it is supposed to be like this." This is the glory of what it is to be human. 

Jupiter in detriment in the white book: The inability to make commitments. The power of caution. That 
power of caution means that these are people that are not ready to commit themselves to experience and 
because of that, they can become very weak. Their bodies can become weak. On the mundane level, their 
bodies do not get the necessary exercise, the necessary process of getting involved in the experience, to 
do the things to keep it going. 

It all comes down to this whole business about whether we can accept that these are our vehicles and that 
they are perfect. Everybody gets exactly the model that belongs to them. So much of that deep philosophy 
is what is rooted here in the 29th hexagram. That is why it is both the commitment to life and the 
commitment to death. "I don't like this model. I will not fix it. I'll just let it die. I will let it fall apart." That 
is the other side of the 29: "I don't love this body." This gate is not aware. It is just energy. 

Everybody thinks that the discovery of succeeding where others fail is about what they do but it is about 
how you live in the experience of yourself. It is about the acceptance of form and this is the only mystical 
possibility for abstract people. The only mystical potential for anyone who is abstract is here in this 
channel. It is the acceptance that one is in the right place at the right time, and that begins with your body. 

29.4 Directness 

When you come to the fourth line, you come to the upper trigram and you have the recognition now that 
heaven is there. The first to the third line do not know that. All they know is the deep within the deep, the 
pressure of all that water and the weight of what it is to live in the world, alas, carrying the world around. 
In the first three lines, you meet the most serious people in the world. 29.1, 2 and 3 can be so damn 
serious that it is frightening. There is no laughter in all of that. There is the deep recognition that this body 
has to deal with all kinds of difficulties in moving through the world, and it ain't necessarily a nice trip. 
When you get to the fourth line, it is like, "Oh, there is a sky above." The ability to look across the 
channel is quite different. 

It says, Directness. The shortest distance between two points is a straight line. "That is where I am going: 
straight up. I am getting out of this water. I am getting out of this way. I am going ta-triumph in this 
process." 

Saturn exalted. The wisdom to use the simplest and most direct approach to solve difficulties. "Ah, now 
we have the theme of difficulties which is at the top of the lines. Now, for the first time, we have a 
confrontation with the difficulties. Here is the ability to be fixed in your persistence and go right through 
the difficulties. You go through the difficulties with Saturn which means that you have to be disciplined. 
There has to be a great deal of restraint within you to be able to go through those difficulties, but it is 
there as a potential. 

In the white book: The power to commit oneself to the simplest and most direct process. This is a 
wonderful energy, very fixed. "I have to persist. I said yes and I will go through it. I will get to the place 
that is on the other side." 

On the other side of the directness, the Mercurial side: Simplicity and directness all too often seen as 
inharmonic and aesthetically crude. In the white book: The power of directness often offends others. "Get 
out of my way. I am going this way. This is my experience and I am fixed on it. I am not fixed on your 

experience. I don't want to share it with you. Don't take me away from my process now. I will go through 
my experience." Collective people who do not share are always considered rude. This is just one of the 
jokes of being a collective person because you are expected to share. 

29.5 Overreach 

The first line tells you the essence, that struggle is there for us, step by step, along the way and we are 
here to deal with each struggle and go through the difficulties of it in order to achieve our success in this 
life. When you get to the fifth line, how it is projected upon by the world, the world sees this 29th gate as 
simply being about overreach or overambition. This is how the world sees the energy to say yes all the 
time. 

The Overreach is: The tendency to bite of more than one can chew. It is projected onto these beings that 
they have the capacity not only to be persistent, but in their activity, in what they do experientially, to 
universalize the process. In other words, they can be very valuable contributors and because they have 
that capacity inside of them to universalize the value of an experience, the projection on them that they 
have this capacity brings them into making all kinds of commitments that are not necessarily of value for 
them. Biting off more than one can chew. Here we have a Sun/Earth axis in a line. 

Sun exalted. Where the drive is in the design and not ambition-driven. So, there is this genuine power of 
saying yes: The uncontrollable drive to say yes. It is a deep power inside to say yes, to commit oneself. 

The Earth in detriment. Failed ambition. In terms of the white book: Saying yes, overextending one's 
resources and failing to persevere. That can be devastating. Failing to persevere at its highest level is 
failing to persevere in life, in this ordeal of coming to accept the perfection of what one is, the beauty of 
one's form, the process that one is going through. It is not just about saying yes to too many things and 
having the obvious mundane failures come. So many people with the 29.5 say yes to this and that and, at 
some point, they cannot provide the resources for all of that. They can't. They begin to break promises. 
They begin to disappoint people because what they said they would commit their energy to, they can't 
commit their energy to anymore. 

When you turn that over and you get to the failed ambition on the other side, this can have the same kind 
of devastating impact as the experience of falling into the water and having to be saved and having to go 
through the trauma of that experience. This fifth line, in that sense, raises to another level what it means to 
make a commitment to this life in this form. 

Every time that I deal with abstract people, I always try to remind them that this is what their life is about. 
They are our teachers about the path of experience in life and they are designed for experience in life. 
They do not have to chase after everything simply because it is projected on them. The 3.5 spoke of 
Victimization. The people with the 29.5 can be victimized for their capacity to provide resources, 
victimized by a projecting public that says, "This is the one." 

The young worker that goes into an office and they carry the 29.5, everybody in that office is burdening 
them with something. "You do the paper work over here. By the way, I have a job for you over here." The 
manager behind is saying, "This one has the energy to do anything." Everybody is coming and giving 
them something to work on and the 29.5 says yes until they collapse because it is projected on them and 
they can become a victim of their own power. 

Again, part of that is: if you do not love your form, you are ready to say yes to anything in order to find it, 
to see what it is. So much about what it is to fail in life is that the deepest failure is to not love what it is to 
be you. There is nothing else. In my work, this is the great disease that I see in the world: deep self- 

hatred. I am a mechanic and, as such, I provide information. I know damn well that even though I am 
providing information that is amoralistic, that really tells you the truth about what it is to be in these 
forms, that you are still there thinking, "Yeah, yeah. Maybe I can change this. Maybe I can work on this. 
Maybe I can fix this. Maybe I can be better at this." 

You have to accept what it is that you are, and not what you think that you can become. There is no 
becoming. There is what you are. The real failed ambition here is not accepting your form. The moment 
you accept what you are, you know your own limitations. You know what is there to say yes to and what 
is there not to say yes to. Then this power of universalization becomes something very beautiful. 

By the way, biting off more than you can chew, you can talk to Adam and Eve about that. That is the line 
of Adam and Eve in the Garden of Eden. This is what the Garden is all about. If you want to look for the 
deepest spirituality about the descent of man into this quality of life, you look at this fifth line which is 
called Overreach. "Yes, give me that apple. Yes, let me take a bite from the tree of knowledge." But it is 
not enough because if you only have a bite, you don't know and if you don't know truly what it is to be 
you, you are going to be tormented. Your life will fail inside, the spirit inside. 

I know so many 29.5 people who have suffered so deeply in their lives by being abused by others because 
they have this enormous quality to commit themselves to them. They are deeply beneficial human beings 
to guide us into experience. I have a deep connection to fifth lines, through resonance; I really understand 
the pressure that they are under. As long as they do not accept the nature of what it is to be them, they 
cannot universalize the wonder of what it is to be in form. 

As an individual, I can only give you that as an example of the vibration that I put out to you about what 
it is for me to be inside my body. But I am not a universalizer of that mystical principle because the 
universalizer of that is the 29.5. They can universalize the magnificence of what it is to be in this form, 
instead of being the victims from other people taking this energy away from them. 

29.6 Confusion 

The sixth line is all about transition. The transition here is that the whole concept of commitment becomes 
something totally different. If you are looking at the circuit and if you are trying to see what the whole 
circuitry is (the nature of the circuitry finishes after this channel), you get to the 13/33, to the channel of 
The Witness, and you get to the essence to what the abstract process is about. It is about the nature of 
reflecting on the experience that you have been through so that that experience, after you have reflected 
about it, can then be added to the human library of what experience is. 

When you get to the sixth line, because of the nature of sixth lines, it is saying, "Will this experience 
actually be valuable in the library? Will anybody know about it? Do I really want to know about this? Is it 
really worthwhile?" All of these standard sixth line perspectives. 

The line is called Confusion. The state that exists when momentum outstrips awareness. Because the 
whole circuit is available, there is the sense of "I am an energy" for the 29th gate. "I don't know what is 
going on. I have all this energy to say yes. I have all this energy to go through this process but I really 
don't know what is going on. I am confused about what all this is for." These are the people that will 
always say to you "Why do we have to live this kind of life? Why is being a human like this? Why do we 
have to go through these things? Why must we have this kind of experience in order to live out the human 
process?" There is this great big question that is there. Why? 

Mars exalted. Driving blind and given Mars' energy and determination, often blind luck. Jupiter in 
detriment. A tendency in confusion to withdraw rather than accept the condition and continue to 

persevere. These are people that can really step out. They can step out to the point that they can literally 
give up life. These are the kind of people that start dying just before they really die. It does not matter 
whether they die by an accident or they get sick, but you know before the time of death that they are 
already dying and you can feel the essence of that. These are people that can withdraw in the deepest 
sense of the word. After all, sixth lines are about the mutative process because it is a transition process. 

Mutation can be positive and negative. You can get to the most negative level of the sixth line, like Blaze 
of glory in the 28.6, and you go burning yourself out into a flaming end. Please understand: it has 
everything to do with the nature of somebody's individual design and not just the fact that this line may 
appear in their chart. If you have somebody who, in their design, has other compensations for that 
possibility, there are ways in which they can go through that and they will be all right. But it is so 
important to understand that that is there in this level of confusion. 

The power to persevere that makes no sense. It does not seem to make any sense unless I can see what its 
value is going to be, though not to me. This is the ultimate impersonal line. My experience has to be of 
value not for me; it has to be of value for everyone else. These are the kind of people that do not want to 
do anything unless they can tell you about it afterwards. These are people that go on a vacation and they 
take 8,000 photographs and you have to go through the whole thing. Now they have videos. They tell 
you, "This was my experience. Isn't it great? This is for you. I want to share this with you." Unless it 
really appears to be of value, then comes the hesitancy of all sixth lines. 

The power in confusion to caution rather than saying yes. Please remember that that yes can go to many 
different levels, ultimately to the point of saying (or not saying) yes to life. It is always there. One of the 
things that I know but do not teach is the nature of how the 29th gate controls death in our lives. It is so 
important to recognize that if you have people in your life you are working with, or children in your life 
who carry this 29th gate energy, that one of the most important things for them to understand it that life is 
a bitch. It is okay. What to do? It will be difficult. 

The moment that they really know that, they do not have any false expectations about the heaven at the 
other end, as long as they understand. These are human beings; these are children that have to be clearly 
told: "Life can be hard. You will find that out. But it is okay. You stay with it. You will grow. You will 
mature. You will get to the other end. By the way, you are perfectly equipped for it." 

People who are abstract in their design are equipped for the abstract plane. The thing for them to 
recognize is that everything that is abstract brings crisis, change and instability and all kinds of problems. 
Belief systems that break down. All kinds of things are part of our human experience. These people need 
to understand that life is difficult but that does not mean that life is bad. It does not mean that being who 
you are is not capable of dealing with the difficulties that life offers. The joke of course is: when you go 
from the 29.6, you go to the 59.1 and it says, "You are confused? You don't know whether your body is 
worth anything? Go make love to somebody, you fool, and find out how incredible it is to have a body." 

HEXAGRAM 30 THE CLINGING FIRE 

Everything about the abstract process is about its experiential nature. Because the abstract process will 
never experience awareness, by the time that the rest of the circuitry that is going out of the emotional 
system has gained the capacity for spiritual awareness, by the time the change comes, this is a process that 
will be eliminated. 

The abstract process is a purely human process. It is our evolutionary process, our experiential process, 
and the 30th hexagram in that case represents something unusual. It represents the potential to feel and to 
long for an experience. Without this potential, we would not have our history. We would not have had all 
the crisis and change that this whole stream of energy has brought. So the 30th hexagram is the beginning 
of Aquarius. The 30th hexagram is something special to us. This is a direction that we are moving 
towards. 

When the spring equinox is in Aquarius, it will be in the sixth line of the 30th hexagram and it will be the 
beginning of this process of the Aquarian age. So the 30th hexagram has a lot of value to us. The Clinging 
Fire is the gate of feeling. Its potential is the awareness to recognize a feeling, or not. It is the energy to 
generate a feeling, or not. Don't be misled by this awareness terminology. It is an energy to feel or not, 
and its potential is hunger/thirst recognition. Everything about the experiential stream is about hunger in 
the beginning (the 41st hexagram, the initiator codon) and being full at the end (the 35th hexagram, 
Progress). The 30th hexagram is the capacity to recognize the feeling to eat or drink. 

We talked about the need for humanity to be able to satisfy the demand of hunger and you see that the 
primary human experience is the recognition of hunger and the energy to go and pursue that hunger until 
one has found food and one can eat. Just as food is a fundamental drive for that stream, sexuality is a 
fundamental drive of this stream. They are all locked up together in this process. 

The best description I know of the Aquarian Age and the nature of this gate is above the lines: Freedom 
recognized as an illusion and limitation accepted as fate. This is the nature of what we are moving 
towards: the illusion of freedom. Freedom does not exist. This is the recognition that we all fit into a 
pattern and in that, we all have our place, and in that, limitation is a grace. It is not a punishment. This is 
the nature of what we are moving toward. The emotional quality of this gate is driving us towards this. It 
is an extraordinary thing to recognize that the deepest force in the emotional motor in this stream, what it 
is really looking for, is to get out of the experiential business and to be satisfied with the pattern that gives 
value to the nature of what it is to be. 

30.1 Composure 

It begins with the foundation in the first line which is Composure. Hardly what you would imagine. The 
nature of feeling is to go into the process, delve into the process; this is the nature of introspection in the 
first line. 

Balance in the face of disorder. Sun exalted. The maximization of limitation in all cases. Jupiter in 
detriment. The ability to maintain composure but at the expense of progress. This gate burns with 
feelings. This is a gate of yearning and longing. In that feeling comes an intensity. This is where desire is. 
It is driven by desire. The key to that is the composure. Most people think of this gate as being the 
burning gate. One of the keys is the recognition of composure: the rising of the intensity of the feeling and 
waiting for the opportunity to be able to actualize. 

Stability through feelings, no matter what the situation. When you move from the 30th to the 36th gate, 
you are going to the gate of inexperience that demands the experience. But the 30th gate is living out the 

feeling in the wave, up and down in that wave of feelings. These are people that carry what we call 
feelings. 

Balanced through feelings but unable to let go of them. This is one of the keys to understanding the nature 
of the 30th hexagram: this is obsession. It is all about obsession. Even if one can be composed, the 
obsession is there and the longer the intensity develops in the 30th gate without the capacity to fulfill that, 
the deeper the obsession becomes. This is a deep hunger that lies inside of the human being. That hunger 
longs to be fulfilled. The nature of this gate is to have composure in spite of obsession. The experience 
can be in the feeling itself without any consummation. 

30.2 Pragmatism 

When we get to this second line of projection and consider the mirror at the other side in the 18.2 where 
you have Terminal Disease, here the feelings are projected outwards in the almost desperate need not to 
simply feel it, but do it. This is one of the keys in this line. 

The balance between extremes. Sun exalted. The productive application of energy without wastage. These 
people are not going to release their feelings when there is nothing they can do with them. They release 
them the moment they can do something. Everything they do suddenly gets imbued with this power of 
feeling. No wastage means they do not get lost in all kinds of feelings. 

Mars in detriment. Over-aggressiveness that chafes against limitations. The moment that they cannot get 
their feelings out, they become aggressive because it is very frustrating for them that they can't get it out. 

The Book of Letters says: Not wasting energy on feelings. They don't waste energy on feelings. They are 
pragmatic. They want to waste the energy on the experience, not on the feeling. The feeling for them is, 
"Yes, Yes, but what is the experience?" Their feelings are always waiting for the opportunity of 
experience. 

Feelings which demand energy. They are demanding the opportunity to release the feelings and if they 
can't, they build up a lot of tension. This line in relationships can be very explosive, particularly if they 
are with somebody who suddenly turns on their emotional system: the 30.2 in an undefined emotional 
system and someone comes along and pumps up their emotional system; this can be a powerful thing. 
There is a great deal of emotional energy that is locked up in here waiting for the opportunity to burst out, 
with predictable results in terms of what happens with other people. It often is simply a feeling-overload. 

I knew someone like that who dropped by my house every time I made some music. He immediately 
made me so emotional that I had to stop. The moment that he had an outlet for this emotional feeling, he 
was just pouring them out. It would not matter if it was a dead dog, he could have his opportunity to 
release his energy crying, laughing, and if you are open to that, you take that in. This is uncomfortable 
because it carries this feeling intensity. These people are great for sannyasin therapies. 

30.3 Resignation 

When you come to the third line, you come to a deeply spiritual line. It is an extraordinary line. I am 
always amazed that it is there in this gate. The nature of this line and what this line will represent later in 
our process, in our development, will become more significant. 

The line is called Resignation. It says: The acceptance of what is. Pluto exalted. The awareness and 
manifestation of the law of regeneration. The laws of Karma, reincarnation and resurrection. Jupiter in 
detriment. The tendency by its very knowledge to encourage or avoid despair. 

Think about the nature of this line. This is an adaptation line. It is the end of the trigram. It can be 
inherently irresponsible. We know it is about bonds made and broken. We know that the wave here is 
allegiance and rejection. What is in that wave and what happens to these people over time is that, out of a 
recognition (after all, this is the channel of Recognition) comes an acceptance of the nature of the wave, 
the acceptance of what it is to be emotional. It does not happen right away. It takes them time; after all 
there is no awareness here until they do recognize that what is, is. "I am up, I am up. I am down, I am 
down. I feel that the world is beautiful. I feel that the world is shit." This is just what is, and out of that 
recognition comes the acceptance of what it is to be emotional. 

These people grasp the nature of the emotions and can be in despair about that because out of that 
recognition does not come awareness. Out of this recognition can come emotional clarity. The highest 
level that this stream can attain is emotional clarity, to recognize that what is, is. It is an irresponsibility to 
the process of the feeling. If the feeling cannot result in change or progress, it is not about becoming 
obsessed with the feeling. It is about surrendering to 'this is what is'. At the high end of the wave, it will 
be acceptable and at the low end of the wave, it is full of pain but nonetheless, this is the nature of the! 
motor. 

Ih the, Book of Letters: The feeling to accept what is. Not-the awareness; the feeling to accept what is. 
This comes only from experience. This is one of the-deepest things that we recognize about the nature of 
the emotional environment, all know this. People in our lives and people that we love,, we!watch them as 
they-grow older and as emotional people grow older,, generally they mellow.. They mellow with 
experience. They have made a fool out of themselves so. many times, they have been hurt so many times, 
they watched others get hurt so many times that slowly they begin to recognize the nature of what the 
wave is. The greatest gift that can come to anyone with a defined emotional system is the, recognition that 
the wave is there and there is nothing one can do about it,, other than just let it be what it is This is the 
beauty that lies in this line. 

The positive or negative feelings that come with acceptance. You don't have to like it. This business about 
having to like, your life: you don't have to like it. You have to accept it.. It is not about liking. You can 
love people that you don't Ike. We all know that. You can like people you don't love. You don't have to 
like your life; you can love it and not like it but you will never lb we it unless you can, accept it.. 

Everybody thinks that they are here to improve their lives. They are not. Your life does not need any 
improving. It is exactly what it is supposed to be, and nothing else. For the emotional being to accept the 
nature of the wave is to survive life; otherwise they can't. Otherwise they are always in pain, always full 
of hope and projecting that onto others. 

This is a very beautiful hexagram. People who have this are very interested in reincarnation. They have 
this as a theme. This line is very mystical. Once you accept it, then you see the whole pattern, you see the 
wheel, you see the spiral. 

30.4 Burnout 

The fourth line: the beginning of the upper trigram and the process of externalization. These people make 
other people sick. They make others emotionally unstable. They are less likely to show evidence of this 
themselves, but they can have deep impact on the people around them. The line is called Burnout. An 
unrealistic pace that begs misfortune. These are experience junkies. These are people who must have 
experience. They can only develop their feelings through experience and they must share their feelings 
with someone else. 

Pluto exalted. A compulsive and hyperactive nature that carries all the earmarks of burnout but doesn't 
necessarily arrive at it. A positive outcome is often assisted through analysis. This is a classic situation. 
You have a parent that has the 30.4 and they have a child with an undefined emotional system. The child 
becomes hyperactive and it gets sent into analysis. The 30.4 really impacts on other human beings much 
more that on themselves. 

Jupiter in detriment. Uncontrollable expansion with the inevitable bursting of the bubble. In this 
hexagram, you have three different situations in which Jupiter is in the detriment. This emotional field is 
enormously expansive. 

Highly energized feelings that may lead to emotional collapse. I have the 41.3, so my resonance is not to 
the fourth line. A friend of mine has the fourth line. Whenever that person visits me, it is so 
uncomfortable for me because I notice that, after they have been there for ten or fifteen minutes, I get up 
and go to work. I start doing something-an experience. I suddenly have the feeling that I have to do this. 

These people can be really obsessive about living out their feeling in that sense, but it is what they do to 
others that is so powerful. Remember that by the time you get to the fourth line, you get to a line that by 
its very nature is there to externalize a single track. And it is a collective circuit and it is about sharing, 
and the very next step is to penetrate somebody. When you see this, particularly in couples or parent-child 
relationships, this is something to talk about with them because this can always lead to a great deal of 
problems and misunderstanding about the nature of it. The person with the undefined system who takes 
that in becomes deeply vulnerable to that because they become twice as explosive. 

30.5 Irony 

When you get to fifth line, you get to the universalization. The line is called Irony. It says: Recognition 
and dedication to transitory goals. Jupiter exalted. The strength derived from knowledge and experience 
that two steps forward and one step back is still one step forward. 

Understand what happens to these people. This is all about sex, food and experience. They have an 
interesting love affair and they leave their lover because they find something more interesting. They are a 
30th gate. They have a yearning and a desire and they see a new lover and they go ahead and have a new 
love affair. It turns out to be terrific. 

Six months later, they go shopping and go into a cafe and there is their old lover. There is a feeling inside 
of them that says, "Maybe we should try it again and see if that was really what I thought it was when I 
left." What happens to them is that the whole experiential process is about gaining experience and not 
repeating it because it is not worthwhile, but there are many situations in which you cannot know that 
until you have had the experience a few times. They will go through that process where they will take 
their step ahead and will have their new experience but there is always a holding on to the feeling from 
before. That can pull them back to that feeling. They can often feel very funny in a situation where 
suddenly they thought that they were through with something and then they have to come all the way 
back and deal with it again. The whole thing about that line is that everything is the same, except how you 
handle it. 

Pluto in detriment. The anger engendered by the irony, frustration with its limitations and a desire to 
eliminate the entire process. "I will get rid of both of them because something is wrong. Why should I go 
back? Shouldn't I be satisfied with where I am?" They have to learn that this is the only way in which 
they will come to grips with the experiential pathway. They are double-checkers with their feelings. They 
go back and check it out one more time and then they walk away and say, "Yes, I was right. I got that on 
my way, but now I'll get rid of that feeling and now I can go on to the next experience." 

In the Book of Letters: Each new feeling brings back an old feeling before progress can take place. That 
new feeling brings back an old feeling which lingers in there and you think, "I don't know if I am doing 
the right thing." 

Frustration and anger with the old feelings brought into the emotional awareness with each new 
experience. "Why is it still there with me? Does that mean that I am not in the right experience for me 
now?" This can be a real torment. These people get torn in their feelings. They have the new experience 
that they are participating in and the old feeling that is still lingering there, and the two of them fight with 
each other in the emotional system. Depending on their wave, that struggle can either be full of hope or 
full of pain. Eventually, they get rid of that old feeling because the new one is okay. In the low end of the 
wave: "Oh, my god. This new feeling must have been a trick. I'd better check out the old feeling again." 
These are, by the way, the most seductive of these people because they simply do have the experience. 

30.6 Enforcement 

We come to the roof of the house, the line of transition. Remember the mirrors in Design because they are 
very funny. The 18.6 is Buddhahood. The 30.6 is not Work on what has been spoilt but it is 'the spoilt 
one.' In the 30.6 we find the emotionally spoilt one. They only want the best experiences. They only want 
to have the thrill of the emotional life. This is what is so important to them. 

It is called Enforcement. The discipline to maintain right action. Mars exalted. The assertiveness to purge 
the inferior while accepting to lead the weak. The strength to eliminate negative feelings. They don't want 
to have negative feelings. They are looking for the feel-good in life. They hope that somebody will bring 
it to them. Because of that, these are some of the cleverest people in knowing exactly who to yearn for. 
They are very good at this. They are good at looking exactly for that energy that is going to give them that 
kind of life. The same is true for the 18.6, finding someone who will spoil them. This is one of their gifts. 
The 30.6 is somebody who needs to be spoilt emotionally. 

Moon in detriment. An inherent peacefulness that all too often will abide the presence of inferior forces. 
Now, think about this: both of these lines in the Rave I'Ching are talking about dealing with inferior 
forces and remember that every hexagram, when you get to the roof, is looking to the next hexagram, in 
this case the 55.1, which is all about finding the spirit through cooperation with superior forces. 

The whole thing about the experiential path is that it seems like it can be full of all kinds of inferior 
forces. That is what you learn along the experiential path. What works? What does mot work?'Who can 
do' it and who can't? Where the (progress is and where' it is not. The deepest thing the 30.6 is looking for 
is the real superior force, lit is interested im (people and this is very unusual. This is a collective circuit 
and iit is not personal: it -tends to be the kind of relationship that is simply for the experience itself and 
yet the sixth line says, "I know all that. I want more. I want the superior experience. 1 wont a superior 
person in my life because II know that I have 'to shore it with somreone." 

HEXAGRAM 31 INFLUENCE 

The channel 31/7, the channel of theAlpha, for good or bad, a design of leadership. There are no more 
connotations in this. This is the mechanic to be influential. This is the mechanic to lead. It says above the 
lines: The law of friction, whether active or passive, that engenders transference and thus influence. It is 
transference that influence is all about. That is, what has to be transferred needs to be transferred to those 
who have the power to act on it. Remember, we have a primary gate of identity and we have a logical 
process that suffers a deep restriction of energy. 

The 31 represents what we call in our process a democratic leader, what we call democracy. It is 
somebody that has to be elected or selected. When somebody is a political leader, no matter how they got 
to that position, they are going to have to transfer their leadership quality to others. They have to transfer 
a pattern to others; otherwise, nothing gets led. It is as simple as that. In other words, the leader is always 
going to be dependent on their quality of transference. If the quality of transference is of value, then their 
leadership can be of value. If what they transfer is not of value, then the opposite occurs. 

31.1 Manifestation 

Here the first line is called Manifestation. We are dealing with the throat, which is the great center of 
manifestation. This is the only line that is called Manifestation. This is a key. This is fundamental. 

Remember the relationship that exists between the logical process and all other forms of life. Whether 
you are looking at plants, at animals, at insects or at a single cell, you are dealing with forms that have 
something in common. What they have in common is logic. It is very important for us. Without secure 
patterns upon which we can project into the future, it puts an enormous strain on our ability to survive. 
That is why logic is so important to us: to understand how things actually operate, in fact, and out of that, 
to recognize how we can move into the future. There is no guarantee about the future but it gives us a 
secure footing. That is why we look for logical leadership and are disturbed by illogical leadership. 

Influence cannot exist in a vacuum. This is the foundation of all leadership. Every leader knows that they 
are only as strong as those who follow. This is the core of all leadership. There is no leader out of the 31/7 
that can be of any value unless they have those who are willingly serving and following. This is not the 
45; this is not the tribal leader. This is a collective leader who is dependent on the energy of the collective 
to maintain it. If we do not like our politicians, we vote them out, in that sense. Without the collective 
support, they cannot maintain their leadership. 

Here you have an example of a line that has the Sun and the Earth as both the exalted and the detriment. 
Whenever you see the Sun and the Earth in the same line, you know that this is a very important polarity. 
Always. 

Here, the Sun exalted. The Sun does not and cannot hold back its light and thus its influence on every life. 
What we are talking about is quality, the quality of a pattern which can bring light or darkness. 

The other side is the Earth in detriment. This was Hitler's line; he had his Earth there. What he inherited 
from his mother was his design Earth. The absorption of light that in darkness can only promise 
manifestation. 

These are the two sides: The natural expression of leadership, natural in the sense of bringing a direct 
benefit in its transference to society. It is giving them something secure to lead them into the future. The 
other side: The unnatural expression of leadership. By the way, that does not mean bad. I am not a 
moralist. If I look at this activation, I can see that, out of that, its direct effect may have been darkness 

(Hitler, for example) but the indirect transference led to a very enlightened generation that followed. The 
nature of the war and its technologies led to all kinds of advances. We would not have people surviving in 
the world through the medicine that we have if we had not experimented on about a hundred million 
people injured in the field during the war. All kinds of medical techniques, all kinds of devices, all kinds 
of things that now benefit all of us were a direct result of that. 

This is not about morality. Don't get into a trip of saying to a 31.1 in detriment, "Oh my god, this is 
terrible." It is not about that. It is simply about recognizing that there are two ways that bring influence. 
There are patterns that bring light; there are patterns that bring darkness. That is just the way that it works. 

Regarding the term 'darkness', by the way, there are patterns that lead one into the form. There are forms 
which lead one into the spirit. This is all part of leadership. It is there. One side or the other. Leadership, 
good or bad. That is the nature of it. This moral question, good or bad, is how it is perceived on the 
outside, but the reality is that there is no good or bad in leadership. There is only good or bad when you 
are making a moral reference to it. It says very clearly as a basis that leadership is never a guarantee for us 
in terms of whether it is directly of value to us or whether it is a long term process that is of value to us. 

Leadership can appear to be both dark and light in our process. We have that in any kind of political 
leadership. The moment that we are unhappy with a political leader, we immediately demonize them and 
try to turn them into a dark force rather than into a light force. The moment we elect them, we are very 
excited about them and turn them into a light force. After all, a leader is dependent on the energy of the 
followers. This is never to be forgotten. All leaders are simply a representation of the energy of their 
followers. 

31.2 Arrogance 

When you get to the second line, you get to a line that is called Arrogance. Remember that the nature of 
this hexagram is to transfer a pattern. In that way, you lead. When you come to the second line, you come 
to people that are projecting out that they are the leader. Well, yes, but then again, leadership is something 
that takes time. You have to develop certain skills. You have to go through a process. If you are five years 
old and you are yelling, "I am the leader. Follow mel" you may run into difficulties. If you are 40 years 
old and you haven't figured it out and you are yelling, "I am the leader. Follow mel" you will run into 
difficulties. 

Arrogance is Independent action without guidance. "I want to lead the people," and the people are not 
paying any attention. "Maybe I'll do something to get their attention so that they see that I am really there 
to lead them." Or the Mercury in detriment. A reasoned arrogance that out of nervous tension jumps the 
gun and often misfires. This is one of those things that are so difficult for politicians. It is like you are 
planning on running in a political party; you are leading a political party and you are hoping that your 
party will eventually take power and things work out, and all of a sudden you are planning on having a 
coup d'etat. "Well, if it will not work this way, I will jump the gun because they do not pay any attention." 

In the second line, there is no guarantee that that leadership projection carries with it anything worth 
transferring. That can only be checked out by those who want to follow. These people who jump the gun 
and say "I am ready to lead" are often paper tigers and they can't lead at all. It is one of the most common 
things you see in coup d'etats, that you have a bunch of generals who will form a committee in which all 
of them are co-presidents. One of them ends up being a leader. These people here: the one who is the 
ceremonial leader at the time of the coup gets toppled immediately and is gone when the real one shows 
up. 

These people can be paper tigers because they are there saying, "Yes, I am the power to lead." Because 
they have that power to lead, they put out that projection and other people say, "Aren't they arrogant. 
What makes them think that they can actually lead us?" 

By the way, there is a delicious joke to all of this. If you look at the other side of the channel, to the 7.2 
which is its resonance, this is the line of The Democrat. This is one of those things to see about the nature 
of how democracy works. Democracy itself, what we are empowering, is a lot of independent action 
without guidance, which is why we end up with a very corrupt political system. That is another story. 

In London, when the English election had just taken place, there was a short piece about a famous writer, 
Kenneth Clerk. His son, who is in his late sixties and who is somebody that has been in enormous trouble 
with sexual scandals throughout his career, is a conservative representative in a very wealthy 
neighborhood. He was asked by a reporter: "What do your clients expect? What do your constituents 
expect from you?" and he said, "Well. They expect me to keep them rich." The other question was, "What 
about all these sex scandals in your life?" He said: "You know. In politics, to take money is morally 
wrong but sex, I don't know. " 

I mention that because if you have a system that has no way of getting easy money, what you end up with 
is greed and corruption. If you cannot get easy access to the energy, then you have to find some other way 
to get to that energy. Every political party that we have has dirt up their sleeves because they are digging 
for money somewhere and it does not matter how pretty their name is on the surface. When you get down 
into the nitty-gritty, they are all scrounging around for energy. In doing that, all kinds of problems exist, 
not that we can do anything about that. 

31.3 Selectivity 

The nature of a third line is that, in a sense, it is combining the qualities of the first and second line, the 
qualities of introspection and projection. It puts them together into this potential for adaptation. When you 
get to this third line, you get to the key to successful political leadership which lies here. It is called 
Selectivity, which is about recognizing first of all, who should be a follower? This is so important in 
terms of influence. If you influence somebody that cannot implement your pattern, there is very little 
impact. If you influence somebody that can implement your pattern, it will have a lot of impact. This is 
the whole nature of selectivity. It is not about how many people support you. It is about what is the 
quality of that support? Who are they? 

Sun exalted. The ability to carefully assess and choose the proper influence and to tailor one's behavior 
accordingly. Think about that because there is a kind of twist in that. The politician has to be influenced 
by the follower, so we have all of these followers. They have lobbies and causes and they all have their 
way that they try to influence the person who actually acts as the leader. The leader has to recognize that 
every follower that they have has their own agenda. They have to carefully select what influences they 
want to accept from their followers in order to maintain their role as a leader of those followers. So, they 
have to be very careful and clear about with what those followers want to influence them, so that they can 
be their guide, in that sense. 

On the other side, we have Jupiter in detriment. Qualitative selectivity with the risk of a runaway 
enthusiasm that may lead to humiliation. "You want to follow me? Oh, that is wonderful. Let me give you 
all of this stuff to transfer." If that person can't, the energy is wasted and confusion comes out of that. A 
lack of influence is generated out of that. 

In the white book: The capacity to lead enhanced through association with the proper influences. But 
always remember that we are dealing with a third line: adaptation is based on trial and error. You will 

have to deal with bad influences, with the wrong kind of people, the wrong kind of followers, before you 
get to the opportunity to recognize how that really works. 

At the other side of the line, we have: The drive to lead that will accept any follower and the risks. This is 
Jupiter at its worst, in that sense: the expansiveness of Jupiter that says, "Yes, you can come. If you want 
to follow me, that is fine. I'll give you this to do." Thus, you end up with all kinds of difficulties in that. 
The key for anybody who is carrying third lines is always this recognition that you are going to go 
through these processes and you are going to make these mistakes that you will have to learn from. 

What you have to learn is that the third line, because it is not yet transpersonal, has this genetic 
recognition that it can lead, but it has to make mistakes in leadership before it can recognize that it cannot 
do it alone and that it needs the proper forces with it because it is not so much leading with its influence 
as it is taking the influence of its followers and channeling it. That is what a leader does. 

Today, though it is politically correct to condemn it, we have a political environment in which politicians 
very carefully watch the polls. Everybody is screaming and yelling about how we have lost the days 
where our politicians directed us instead of the politicians trying to figure out where we want to go and 
taking us there. This is a real improvement. This is the essence of how things should work in this context 
of influence, that one has to take into account the needs and the direction of the totality, the needs of the 
collective, and act as a focus to represent them. No leader actually has their own influence in that sense. 
They are always taking the influence of the followers and giving it a focal point. That is the nature of this 
line. The third lines learn from its mistakes. 

31.4 Intent 

When we get to this upper trigram, we get to the fourth and fifth lines which are transpersonal. They are 
deeply aware of the other side and deeply aware of the identity and that they need to project out this role 
of being a leader. The fourth line, the line of Intent, is an unusual line. Whenever I meet this line in 
people's readings, I exactly meet the same phenomena in their lives. The fourth line is about externalizing. 
It is about having this one-trackedness that we are very well aware of by now. What you have here is: The 
success of influence based on how it is perceived. 

Think about how this works. You have two people who have exactly the same problem, theoretically. 
They come to the 31.4 with exactly the same problem and the 31.4 transfers their influence to each of 
them and tells each of them exactly the same thing. The 31.4 leads them (this is the voice, "I lead") in this 
way. You have these two people, they have exactly the same problem, they go to the same leader, the 
leader tells them exactly the same thing and one of the two people, no matter how it all comes out, will 
love them and the other one will hate them. One of them thinks that they are the best leader that ever lived 
and the other will think that they are a terrible, manipulative bastard that should not be in the world. 

For the 31 .4, no matter how they externalize it, there are always those that like it and those that do not 
like it, no matter whether it is a good or a bad thing. It makes no difference. This is the nature of intent. 

The Moon exalted. Public acknowledgment of a nurturing and protective influence. Or Mars in detriment: 
Perceived ego aggrandizement and attempted manipulation. If you have that fixed on one side or the 
other, your influence can always be perceived as being very nice and valuable and helpful, or your 
influence is perceived as being terrible. But for most people who have this line, they are always getting 
this polarity, no matter what they do. 

In the white book: External positive recognition of one's capacity to lead, or External negative projection 
of one's capacity to lead. In other words, it does not make any difference. This is just about externalizing 

the influence and, because this is the resonance to the foundation, everybody who is in the position of 
being a leader recognizes that no matter what they do, there will be a segment in the population that hates 
it and another segment in the population that loves it. 

That is the nature of collective direction. You can't please all of the people all of the time. This is what 
this fourth line has to recognize. Very difficult in children. After all, a child that has the 31 st gate is a 
child that has within it a genetic capacity to lead, and if they have the fourth line, even when they lead in a 
successful way, even when their leadership is of value, they will have to deal with other kids in their 
group who will hate them for that, even though other kids love them for the very same leadership. 

This can be very difficult, particularly for people who have an undefined emotional system, to be this 
kind of leader. The 3 1 .4 with an open emotional system will have such a thin skin and will be so easily 
disturbed by the negative side that they will fail to see the positive attributes of their leadership. 

It is very important to understand something intrinsic in the collective process: it is not personal. That is 
one of the reasons why we do not particularly like our leaders personally. The collective is not personal. 
The moment we make it personal, we have a problem. This is collective leadership and, in the collective 
sense, you are always going to meet criticism. You will meet those who are satisfied with you and those 
who are dissatisfied with you. You need to have a thick skin. Whenever I meet somebody with the 3 I tell 
them: you have to have a thick skin because you can't expect that what you do is going to get universal 
approval. It will never get universal approval. You get half of the people and the other half will not like it. 
That is just the way it works. 

31.5 Self-righteousness 

The first line always shows us the basic nature of a hexagram and we have seen that the nature of this gate 
of Influence is to manifest the influence, to make the transference. When we get to the fifth line, we see 
how leadership is perceived by the world and the way people perceive influence and those that carry 
influence is this line of Self-righteousness. It is projected on the universal leader that they are only 
interested in themselves. They are only interested in power, in being the boss, in being in charge. This is 
the standard world view impression of our leaders: that they are in it for their own self-aggrandizement. 

Lack of external influence guaranteed by attitude. Pluto exalted. A natural specialization that one 
develops in isolation. However, when the development is complete, the extremely difficult and generally 
impossible task of externalizing the influence. 

This is a line that is universal. These are the only ones in the first five lines of leadership that are really 
only interested in being their own leader. The fifth line is interested in being its own leader. It is very 
fixed on leading itself. It is not so concerned about being anybody else's leader, but the outside world is 
projecting on them, because they look like people who are leading themselves, that they have influence 
and are comfortable with their direction. Other people project on them and say, "Hey, what about us? 
Why don't you share that with us?" 

The fifth line recognizes the pull that is coming from the other side, but the other side, in the 7.5, is The 
General. This is about only being a leader in times of crisis. This is not your everyday leader. It is a 
difficult task to externalize this quality of leadership and only in times when it is absolutely essential, 
when the pressure is the most profound, is there a possibility for these people to externalize that influence. 

The Moon in detriment. A deep focus on personal experience that is self-fulfilling and has no external 
ambitions. "I am too busy leading my own life, why should I lead yours? My life is much more important 

to me than the collective's life and, aside from that, I do not think that you got it right. " (The resonance to 
the arrogance in the second line.) 

In the white book: A specialization that demands that one lead oneself; or A lack of ambition where one is 
content to lead oneself. These are reluctant leaders, but at the same time, when they do get into power, 
they are very effective. Then they get this whole projection on them that they are the self-righteous ones. 

I always use the illustration of ancient Greece. Athens would get into trouble and they would hire a 
dictator who organized society and the army and got everything done. When everything was coming to a 
conclusion, then all the so-called democrats started saying, "They are only concerned about themselves. 
They are really self-righteous and not really concerned about us, and thus it's time for them to go. " This is 
the real quality of leadership that the outside is projecting on: the self-righteous leader that does not really 
care about you, that only cares about themselves and therefore, one has to be concerned about the nature 
of their leadership. You can see the resonance in the gate of behavior in the 10.5, The Heretic, saying, 
"Why do you force me to lead you? You will only hang me afterwards." 

We saw in the fifth lines throughout that they all have to do with timing. We saw in the 8.5, Dharma, that 
you have to know when to let people out of your taxi cab. We saw in the 33.5 that you have to have the 
right timing in order to know when to release the secrets. The same thing is true for this form of 
leadership. It only works at certain times. The time has to be right and then the power of that leadership 
can be actualized. It is a matter of timing. 

31.6 Application 

When we get to the sixth line, we get to the transition line. We know that the transition is rooted in the 
awareness frequency of trust or not. "Can I really trust in this? Can it really go beyond?" If you are 
looking at the whole logical circuit, "Will this leadership provide humanity with a secure future?" When 
you get to the sixth line, you get to the fundamental recognition of limitation. Sixth lines get to see or get 
to experience the limitation in their own process. 

The sixth line says Application. This is not a gate of action. To manifest logic is very hard. You have to 
go down the talent channel and down the 18/58. It is a long process to get to the energy. That is why our 
collective systems are corrupt. Political parties are looking for money. It is so difficult to get to the 
energy. 

This line says: Actions which match the words and thus guarantee success. The 31.6 says, "Yes, I can say 
that, but whether that is actually going to happen is another story. I can transfer that influence but whether 
it is actually going to manifest is another story. I don't think it really will. I will have to come up with a 
leadership, a pattern that is so vital, so essential that humanity will offer its energy to it. Otherwise, it is 
not going to work." 

When it does not work, when the power to actually manifest as doing is not there, then you get the Moon 
in detriment. A superficiality in application that borders on hypocrisy and is justifiably treated 
accordingly. People who have the 31.6 learn very early in life that when they say, "I lead. I will do this," 
and then they can't because they do not have access to the energy, they then sound like hypocrites. They 
end up saying, "Do what I say not what I do because I can't do it myself." Because they learn that very 
quickly, there is a part of them that stands back and says, "I am not going to lead anything because there 
is no guarantee that I am going to have the energy to be able to manifest my program." That is like 
somebody saying: "I'll be the political leader of this party if you can assure me that everybody is going to 
vote for me and I win; Otherwise, I do not want to be the leader. I mean, why should I be the leader of 
this party when I can't win and actually influence society? Why should I be the leader of this party if all I 

can do is to talk when I won't be able to do anything about it? I won't be able to show that it really 
works." 

The joke is that the 31.6 goes to the 33.1. It goes back to Retreat. It goes to the abstract process. The first 
line of the gate of Retreat is Avoidance which is all about sitting there and going through this process of 
withdrawing so that you can reflect on it. The 31.6 is saying, "What I would really like to be able to see is 
that if I am the head of the party: everybody votes for me and then I bring in this program and we 
actualize it. Then I can sit over here in the 33rd gate and I can look back at it and say, "Yes, based on 
experience, I made a real contribution to society." Puffing the horse before the cart is the whole trap in the 
collective process. Don't expect these people to lead you unless they have a chance to get everything. If 
they do not have a chance to get it all, if they can't win and direct, they are not going to be in such a hurry 
to lead at all. 

HEXAGRAM 32 DURATION 

The 32nd hexagram is part of the channel of Transformation, a design of being driven. It is fueled by the 
energy of the 54th gate, the Marrying Maiden, the gate of ambition. The 32nd gate, like all gates in the 
splenic awareness, like all gates of awareness, is a gate of fear, and the fear of the 32nd gate is the fear of 
failure. Because it is the nature of the fear that is associated with this gate, every single line of the 32nd 
gate is dealing at some level or another with the fear of failure. 

The 32nd gate is Duration, and it is the gate of continuity. It is a deeply conservative gate. It is the mirror 
of the emotional revolutionary in the 49 on the other side. It is conservative for the benefit of the tribe. It 
is trying to conserve the material success because it does not want to be a failure. Everything about the 
instinctive stream has to do with achieving material success for the tribe. The 32nd gate is deeply 
concerned about whether or not it will be a success and is very much afraid of failure. 

It is an instinctive stream which is deeply related to the nose. People with the 32nd gate can smell failure 
coming because they have an attribute which is the remembrance of failure, unlike the 54th gate that can 
only remember victory. That is why it is inherently conservative. It can recognize that transformation can 
always take place. 

The awareness here is to recognize what can be transformed, what should be transformed, or not. The 
ambition of the 54 does not always have to be satisfied. There is a time to move up the ladder. There is a 
time to change your product line. There is a time to go through these processes. The awareness in the 32 
is trying to judge clearly what can and what cannot be transformed. 

The awareness potential: this is a liquid regulator. Our memory is in our water. The water in the cells 
carries our memory. This is all about a memory stream. Any activation in this stream is always going to 
be an indication of deep cellular memory in a human being. There is a memory for what did not work. By 
the way, the smell of failure builds up over a lifetime of seeing what does not work and getting a smell of 
what does not work so that you can pick up a whiff of that when it is coming. 

When you look in the Rave I'Ching at the heading above the line for the 32nd hexagram, it says: The only 
thing which endures is change. Don't misunderstand the nature of the 32nd gate. It is conservative, but 
radical conservatism leads to annihilation, leads to the end, leads to failure. For example, you have all 
these people who are still trying to produce teletype machines after the telefax came. It is time to 
recognize that you can only get to some point and then you have to change it. If you don't change, you are 
going to be left by the wayside. 

Built into the nature of the 32nd gate is always a recognition that what truly endures is change, which is 
the evolutionary process. This is about being conservative in terms of what you will change to. This is the 
nature of the conservativeness here. It is not about rejecting change. This is very important to understand 
because it helps us to recognize that the tribe can be changed because, at its most conservative gate, 
change is its nature. It is how one approaches that change. 

32.1 Conservation 

In the first line, we start with introspection. We are starting with the foundation of the house. The first line 
will look inwards. It is the most conservative of all of these lines. 

It is called Conservation. A life sustaining respect and attention to all aspects of a process. This is the 
ideal of the introspective field. In other words, yes, change is inevitable but I will make sure that I have 
all the details before I get involved with that change and leave behind tradition. 

Mars in detriment. An uncontrollable urge to bypass essentials which inevitably leads to the disruption of 
continuity. Because it is the tribe and because it is inherently conservative, if you jump over the details, 
you will not be able to make the transition from what was old to what can be new. There will be 
something missing and you will end up with all kinds of problems associated with this. 

The first line: because it is essential to the tribe, the detail is essential. What you have with the detriment 
are tribes that make jumps. For example, you can see that we find some Neolithic tribes in the middle of 
the Amazonian jungle, and what do we bring them? We bring them frying pans and mirrors. We bring 
them this whole leap, this whole transformation in their culture, and all the detail is missing in between. 
So many aboriginal people have suffered because there has been this enormous gap between their culture 
and the one that is coming and imposing their way upon them without the detail being there. Those within 
the aboriginal culture who made that jump, because they do not have the details, that inevitably leads to 
problems. They do not have continuity. They lose their culture. They jump into the other culture. They 
don't have the ability to bring the culture along and allow it to mature with new technology and new 
input. 

The first line is about introspection. When the introspection is missing, failure can happen. The failure 
will be there in the continuity. The fear is that, once you see that the change is inevitable (this is the 
channel of being driven), there is this enormous urge to just change. Damn the details. "I want that mirror; 
I don't care about the Madonna." 

One has to be careful with this. It is intended to be very conservative. It is the foundation of the tribe's 
success. The material success in the tribe is, "Okay, but let's keep our continuity." All the aboriginal 
people that were integrated into other cultures now make their living by selling their aboriginal art. They 
kept their culture and it becomes a material success for them because their continuity is of value. They've 
brought the past into the future and they can offer it and still provide for the nature of the tribe. 

When you are looking at the ego circuit, you are looking at the two streams that go to the ego. The 
emotional stream that goes to the ego, the stream of sensitivity, is all about communal life. The communal 
life is looking for the initiation (25/51). Here, you have a natural flow that takes place and this is not 
about communal life but life in the corporate culture. It is about the work structure. Who is working with 
whom and how we work together is organized in this stream. It begins in the 45th gate which is the owner 
of the company. The 21st gate is the president, the 26th gate is the salesman or the head of sales, the 44th 
gate is the personnel manager and the 32nd gate is the financial officer. 

The 32nd gate decides whether money is spent or not and on what money is spent. They have a great deal 
of power because of that and because below the financial manager are all these people in the 54 who try 
to climb up the corporate ladder, the Marrying Maidens who want to go all the way up to the top and be 
the CEO. The 54's are always trying to be familiar with the 32's. The 32s are always in a situation where 
the Marrying Maidens, with their ambition, are trying to get the financial officer to invest in things so that 
the transformation and the change can take place. 

32.2 Restraint 

Ilm the Rave I'Ching it says: The control of power for the.benefitand enhancement of Jrarmony. "I will 
not proviide imomey for this person to be hired." 5d's,are always trying to be familiar. That is their job.. 
Like the 19's on the Other side, they are always flirting. Tlhe 5d"s flirt to be familiar: you go up to the 
boss while he is having his dinner and say, "Good evening, Mr. So and so," and they book at you and say, 
"Do I know you?" "Yes, I work in the department." 

The other side of this jupiter in detriment. A tendency in frustration, ;particularly from a position of 
strength, to social withdrawal rather than persistent control. The projection here is that II have to control 
everything, 'phase people are control freaks. Tlhis leads directly to the 21. 

This is very tribal business. "I have -to control the resources to make sure that there is no failure. I am 
either going to control it harmoniously or in a way that people are very uncomfortable -with ime. I say, 
you are Hired." That is what the :32 can always say. I can look -at the Marrying Maiden and say, *Yes, 
very nice." The same one that comes up to the 'boss and says, "Good morning, Mr. So-and-so," if the boss 
looks at you and says, "Who are you?" then you Will not make your way up the ladder. 

Restraint is what the note is here. The potential for transformation that may be beneficial to others. But 
the second line is in control of this, projecting it out. We know that second lines can lead to problems due 
to their projection. The 32.2 can get into trouble projecting into the Marrying Maiden and saying, "Yes, 
this is a wonderful idea. This is what we will do. This is what will be the change." They are just 
projecting it out. They project their power, "I have got the pocket book. I am projecting my power." This 
creates problems and disharmony. 

The frustration with controls or being controlled. The frustration of having to control people all the time. 
Once you project power outwards, then you are stuck having to live with it. 

For analysts, all second lines are difficult to read because, basically, we do not want to tell people things 
that we think, moralistically, are uncomfortable. You don't want to tell somebody about their 58.2, that 
they have the line of Perversion. Everybody gets very nervous. When you are looking at the second line, 
the thing to recognize is that it is a part of your nature that will get into trouble, and you are supposed to. 
After all, it is a learning process. 

A second line is not by its very nature a problem and, at the same time, design is a duality. The restraint 
can be there. Those who project learn to recognize projection. This is part of the process. There is a 
maturity that can take place in this process. But there is a great deal of frustration that is rooted in this. 

Projecting out power means that you have to back it up and, if you can't back it up, you get into trouble. 
That is where the fear of failure comes in. Can I project my control and maintain it without creating 
disharmony or problems? That would be a failure. No tribal organization, no corporation, can function 
unless there is some level of harmony within the corporate culture. Otherwise, it does not work. 

This is one of the things we had when we were living in a second line phase that existed around the birth 
of Hitler (1888 until 1961) when we were in the previous global cycle. We have been in the first line 
since 1961. Since 1888, we have witnessed the wars that took place: the Russian Japanese War, the First 
and Second World Wars, the Korean War, the Vietnam War, all during a time of projection. The 
projecting of power. All second lines are trying to project out power and they can't necessarily back it up. 
We've lived through an era of projection of power and we saw how devastating that could be to the 
planet. We also saw that, out of that, we have our modern age. There is no good or bad in the movie. 
There is just the movie. 

32.3 Lack of continuity 

This is simply stepping out there for the first time, trying to go across that channel and trying to make 
contact with the 54 on the other side, and the recognition that the 54 is really there. What the 54 is will 
condition the nature of what the 32 is, this recognition of adaptation that has to take place within the 
channel. It is called Lack of continuity. This is exactly opposite to the nature of this hexagram which is 
about continuity. One can be very irresponsible in terms of the nature of how one is conservative. 

Mercury exalted. Indecision and persistent reevaluation, that only because of its basic intelligence 
manages to endure. The thing to recognize here is that this position of the 32nd gate is inherently 
intelligent. If you look at signs of intelligence in somebody's chart there are many, by the way-the 32nd 
hexagram is one of them. It is a sign of intelligence. 

The Jupiterian side is: An over-reliance on traditionally legitimized standards that in times of change can 
be totally out of step and suffer unexpected humiliation. This is the whole thing about third lines anyway. 
You make a bond and then the bond gets broken and there is going to be all kinds of stuff that gets left as 
the debris of that. This is all about the fear of failure. 

Indecision in times of transformation. "What do I do and who do I do it with? Do I do it with you? If I do 
it with you, I cannot do it my way. I have to do it our way." 

The other side of this: A lack of instinct in times of transformation. Not being able to get it at the right 
time. Not being able to adapt at the right time. The three is the kind of person that says to you, "Yes, 
maybe that will work. I'll think about it.." Then they meet you again and they tell you,. "Yes, I really think 
that I will do it. Let's set up a contract." They do not really know. It is indecisionL Everything gets 
prollonged. They are not really certain what to do with all of that. The whole thing them can fall apart. All 
of a sudden, you call them up for the day of the signing and they are not there anymore )because they 
have broken that bond entirely, and it's gone. 

32.4 Right is might 

Whenever you come to the fourth line, remember the resonance between first and fourth linen You are 
coming to the upper trigram and you come to aichange in the nature of the frequency. The fourth line is 
about externalization, the ometrack., You take one. aspect and run along with it: We also know that fourth 
lines are ihheremily corrupt or being corrupted. 

Here we have Right is; might.. Think about that because that is the one-crack. Everything is about the 
power. If you have the power, you are right. Even in times of change, certain underlying principles 
endure. Whoever controls, the! purse, controls, the purse. Where Jupiter will establish right action in, the 
larger social realm, Saturn will lead to inner strength and endurance as long as: it is not threatened from 
the ouiside. 

The instinct to maintain one's principles in times of change; or The instinct to maintain one's principles as 
long as one's security is not threatened. Either you have the power to maintain it, no matter what (Right is 
might) and you corrupt others with that ("I have the power and you do what I say whether you think that 
that is right or not."), or the other side is: "I can only have the power if you do what I tell you to do. I will 
make sure that I will not have people that are working for me who do not listen to my orders, whether 
they like them or not." This is just a one-track. It is neither good nor bad. It can be very successful when 
the principles are correct. If the values are not correct, they still have that one -track-mind. 

32.5 Flexibility 

The fifth line is the fulfillment of the essence of what the hexagram is. It is the capacity to universalize, to 
be able to bring it out, not only to the gate that is at the other end of the channel, but to begin the process 
of moving into the circuitry. This is something that has a broader movement. Due to its collective 
keynote, it is an aspect that can bring the tribe to collective change. 

This is something that we deal with in the tension of the world today. For example, the United Nations, as 
a collective organization, wants the Bosnians, the Serbs and the Croats, who are tribal, to make peace 
with each other. If you want to look at the fulfillment of this hexagram, it is about the flexible projection 
of power. Fifth lines resonate to second lines. It is no longer the pure projection of the second line. This is 
the next step up in this structure. This projection here is all about recognizing that one has to be flexible in 
the way one projects outwards. 

Flexibility. Easy adaptation to circumstances. Moon exalted. Superficiality is a valuable tool that while 
masking the inner light permits adaptation to prevailing conditions. This is all about keeping it 
underneath. You know that you have the power to project but circumstances are not allowing you to 
project your power at this moment. So you bide your time. You wait and see. You wait for your 
opportunity and then you project it out. 

Mars on the other side: The urge to express oneself in direct and often violent rejection of conformity. 
Conformity is the nature of the tribe which is deeply conservative. The violence in this is mirrored on the 
other side in the 49.5. It is mirrored in the possibility of being able to fulfill revolution so that revolution 
becomes a universalized process. In that, there is always the possibility here for vast change in the nature 
of the tribe. Suddenly, the tribe can be brought to a point of becoming one with the collective, in that 
sense. 

An instinct for adaptation in times of change. To know when to project your power and when not to. 
Remember, underneath that is the fear of failure. "I'd better not project my power out because, if I do so, I 
destabilize everything so I'd better hold that all back inside of me and wait and see what happens." 

The potential of the instinct to reject adaptation and conformity in times of change. The keynote: in times 
of change. That is the only time this is going to come into play. These are the kind of people that you 
want holding the purse strings when there is a vast change in the society around you. They are the ones 
who should be in power in those moments. What happens is that they are the ones that naturally have the 
greatest impact in times of change. 

One of the classic examples that you know about is in corporations and what they call downsizing. This is 
the detriment. This is very common. We are not going to look after all the people in the company 
anymore who have been loyal to us for 25 years, who have been our family and allowed us to become 
wealthy. We will fire all of them because our shareholders need profits. We are in times of change 
because we have a globalizing economy, and I am sorry you have to be the victim. We really wanted to 
do this five years ago, but now we can do it. " 

It depends on where you are in that. If you are victim, this is a terrible thing. It appears to be deeply 
violent in that sense. If you are not the victim, it can just mean being flexible. The person who is making 
that decision says, "look, if I do not fire these five thousand workers, the Indonesians will steal my market 
and all my other 25,000 workers will lose their jobs and my shareholders will go mad." That is the other 
side of the story. These things are not one -dimensional. That is the universalizing element. 

Whenever you see fifth lines in a chart, whenever you see transits that are affecting fifth lines, you know 
that there is a special kind of element at work that is trying to get things projected outward in a much 
larger field. This is a universalizing process. 

32.6 Tranquility 

Here, we get to the roof of the house and we are not in the house anymore. The nature of the hexagram is 
going through a transformation. This is one of those lines that I kept running into so often because it can 

be depressive and because we had Neptune activating the other side of it. Therefore, we have a whole 
generation of people in the early 1990's that went into all kinds of severe depressions due to the nature of 
this line. 

Consider that the tribe is essentially materialist even when it is being communal at the other side. 
Communalism is all about coming up with a bargain so that everybody has what they need. Tribal life is, 
by its very nature, material. This aspect of the tribe, moving up to the instinctive stream, is what is 
essential. It is the ability to recognize what will work, what change to accommodate, in order that the 
continuity of the material success of the tribe can survive, so that we need not be afraid of failure. 

The fear of failure is a theme that we all live with. It is a global theme: this deep sense that we cannot fail, 
that we must have the material that we need. When you get to the sixth line, it is kind of like, "Well, I am 
not really interested in just that. There must be something else other than just climbing up the corporate 
ladder, making our bread and butter, doing our job." 

The sixth line is called Tranquility. Change is inevitable. The projection of power in the 32nd hexagram is 
trying to make sure that transformation can take place, that there won't be a failure. It is trying to be 
conservative, trying to continue things. This line says, "Yes, okay, but everything changes. Nothing stays 
the same. Everything just keeps on changing. Am I supposed to control that?" 

The sixth line is not about control anymore. It is a need now. The need to calmly face impermanence. 
Pluto exalted. An underlying acceptance of change that may or may not lead to tranquility. It may, or it 
may not. On the other side, Neptune in detriment. Impermanence as proof of meaninglessness with its 
attendant manifestations, depression, delusion, and in the extreme, self-destruction. "The tribe is 
meaningless, this business is meaningless. Why should I spend 20 years of my life investing in this 
business when it will fall apart anyway due to changes in the society? Why did I spend all this money 
making hula-hoops? It will change. Why did I get involved with 8-track tapes? It will change." There is 
this sense of: "Why bother? Nothing is stable, nothing will last. I will kill myself." 

In the white book: The instinctive awareness to accept change and transformation; or The fear engendered 
when change is experienced as impermanence and the potential for depression. 

Whenever you come to the nature of the sixth line, please recognize that it is always looking for the next 
hexagram. The next hexagram is the 50, the values, and the first line is The Immigrant. The whole thing 
for the sixth line to recognize is that transition is always there and they will always be The Immigrant. 
This is their whole thing. These are not the people to establish a business that is going to last forever. 
They have to be very clear that all of this is coming anyway. They are here to ride the wave so that they 
can be the immigrants that can establish the new values out of what the change brings. These people can 
be visionaries. They can look ahead and say: "I will not do this because I can see what is coming. What is 
coming is either going to frighten them or it gives them a sense of tranquility. "Yes, I can see the change 
is coming. I do not want to get involved with this. I can wait to discover what my values will be in what is 
coming." 

HEXAGRAM 33 RETREAT 

We will now look at one of the two collective gates of identity, this one in the abstract process. (The other 
is the logic process in the 31.) The channel 33/13 is the channel of the Prodigal; it is the channel of the 
witness. The identity of the abstract process is rooted in what we call reflection and remembrance. 
Reflection and remembrance are part of this 13/33. The voice of the 33rd gate is not a voice that says, "I 
know I can contribute." This is a voice that says, "I remember," or "I don't remember". This is the 
remembrance that takes place at the end of an abstract process and the 33rd gate is one of the three gates 
of aloneness. The 12th gate, the 40th gate and the 33rd gate are the three gates of aloneness. 

Whenever I am dealing with abstract people, whether they have this gate or not, or the 13, I always 
remind them that, in order for them to truly make sense out of their life, they have to have time in which 
they reflect. At the end of each day, at the end of each ongoing process, they would benefit from making 
an auric space for themselves where they are not being influenced so that they can have an opportunity to 
reflect on the experience that they have been through. 

This 33rd gate, Retreat, is the gate of privacy. It is the privacy that says, "I will not be able to remember 
everything unless I am left alone so that I can reflect on this process, and then I will be able to remember 
that and, in remembering that, I'll share my reflection with you. The 33rd gate, at its mystical level, is the 
gate of revelation. The unconscious 33 can speak of an unconscious remembrance that emerges out of the 
unconscious and, as such, can have a deep mystical impact. 

Above the lines, it says: Active withdrawal... This is not passive withdrawal; this is not running away. 
This is not a gate that says, "I want to be alone because I have to hide." This is a gate that says, "I need to 
be alone in order to survive. I need to be alone in order to be clear." ...and the transformation of a weak 
position into a strength. Every abstract person is at their weakest point at the moment that an experience 
ends. This is the weakest point for an abstract person because their temptation is to jump into the next 
experience without reflecting on what they have been through. What happens to so many abstract people 
is that they keep on repeating the same experience and that is not what the abstract process is about. It is 
about having an experience, reflecting on it, recognizing its fundamental worth and then going on to the 
next experience, thus turning a weak position into a strength. The weakest position of the abstract being is 
the moment that the experience is over and it is at that point that privacy, separateness, aloneness and the 
opportunity for reflection is essential. This is a minor point. 

The abstract process being what it is, you can never know anything while you are in it. An abstract person 
can never know anything about the experience while they are in it. That is why the key to the abstract 
process is the 46/29, which begins with the concept that you have made a commitment and, in that 
commitment, you are in the right place at the right time. The 29 makes a commitment and the 46 says, "I 
am in the right place at the right time." As long as you accept that, it does not matter what is going on in 
the experience because you can know nothing about it while you are in it. You can only learn from the 
experience when it is over. So, it is very important for abstract people to reflect on their experience and 
not simply to collect experiences. 

33.1 Avoidance 

The first line, the foundation of this hexagram, says Avoidance., After all, this is the framework of the 
identity of the abstract person: avoid everyone until you have reflected and then you can share your 
remembrance. Then you can offer your witnessing. That is what it is about, offering the witnessing. 

The wisdom in a weak position... ('Weak position' meaning that you finish an experience: that is your 
weakest point.) ... to recognize that survival demands complete withdrawal. Pulling away is the key to the 

nature of Retreat. Retreat is there to build strength and abstract strength is built through reflection. 
Without reflection one can be a fool over and over again. It is okay to be a fool once. If you reflect on it 
and understand the nature of what you have experienced, you don't have to be the fool the second time. 

Mars in detriment. Where courage is just plain foolishness. This is a person that will not reflect but jump 
to the next thing. Or, in the sense that it is the identity out of the throat, "I will not reflect on my 
experience and remember it in depth. I will simply babble it all out the moment that it is over." The 
moment that the experience is over, the abstract person does not know anything about it. Whatever they 
babble out will only be an aspect of the wave that they have been through, and not the proper reflection. 

In the white book: Retreating when one realizes that one is in a weak position. Again, at the end of the 
experience is the weakest point. On the other side: Unable to retreat when overwhelmed by stimulation. 
This is the key to that. The abstract person that is pulled from one experience immediately to the next, this 
is always going to be a problem for them. When you are an abstract person and you are in the middle of a 
process and, all of a sudden, there is an emergency, if you are drawn away, in that moment, from what 
you are doing, you lose the value of everything that you have been doing because you won't be able to 
reflect on it. If you can't reflect on it when the experience is over, you will not remember it. You will not 
be able to bring out of that the necessary qualities for the remembrance. 

In the relationship between the hexagram and the genetic codon structure, we have three genetic codons 
that are called stop codons. Stop codons literally are the punctuation points at the end of a genetic 
expression. Two of the genetic stop codons are in the abstract process in the throat. We will see in the 
56th gate the abstract voice that says, "I believe" or "I don't believe". This is a stop codon. In other words, 
the conceptual idea is nothing that goes any further than its capacity to be able to express and share it. The 
33rd hexagram is a stop codon and so is the 12. Here, the process comes to an end when the reflection is 
complete. We saw that the introspection of the first line is the recognition of the value of privacy and its 
power, because one can grow in that. 

33.2 Surrender 

When you get to the second line, you get to a projected field and you get to somebody who projects 
outwards that they are private. They are projecting outwards that they are the reflecting ones. They are 
projecting outwards that they are the ones that remember. Remember the nature of the paper tiger. They 
may or may not remember; they may or may not enjoy their privacy. All of these things are possibilities 
in their process. 

Jupiter exalted. The recognition that surrender to superior forces... ('Superior forces' are anything that is 
going to pull you into a new experience. After all, the abstract being is trapped by the experiential wheel. 
These are people that are really on the wheel. There is this constant pressure on them to enter into another 
experience.) ...can be an opportunity to expand one's own strength and eventually triumph. In other 
words, it is better to wait and avoid a temptation and build up one's reflective capacity, and that may lead 
to success in the future. 

In the white book: Embracing powerful forces in order to lay the foundation for future success. Because 
this is a projected field, you have people who are saying "Leave me alone," but they do not necessarily 
know why. They know that they need to be left alone at the end of an experience, but it is not like they are 
actually using that to get into a deep reflective process. They may or they may not. What they recognize 
genetically is that it is better for them to be apart, to have this aloneness and the opportunity to be separate 
than it is to get hooked up into another experience. This is the genetic structure in that. Remember, this is 
a stop codon saying, "Okay, no more." These are people that can be very withdrawn, without that 

necessarily being an advantage. These are the people that can complain about having to be alone, for 
example. 

Neptune in detriment. Unlike the reasoned and calculated surrender above, the deeper and personal 
surrender. The feeling that one's original position was a delusion and the impressionability that makes 
might right. In the white book: A public embrace of powerful forces and a private resentment of their 
power. There is a deep resentment when one cannot complete one's process and, the moment that 
powerful forces are there and pulling on you to remember, if you are not clear (in this line we are dealing 
with projection), you can really feel like, "Oh, that whole experience was a waste." Imagine what this is 
like for somebody who is going through an experience and, when they finish that experience, before they 
really have a chance to reflect on it in order to see what its value really was, they get pulled by other 
forces; they get pulled to remember and share their witnessing. What they say does not carry the clarity of 
their experience. 

In that moment, by not having impact on those that are pulling that out, they can feel like, "Well, that 
whole experience was a waste because I did not really get to see what it was. My reflection on that is not 
of value," and they put that out into the world and get smashed for that by the outside because they are not 
paying any attention to it. 

This is all about the process of development, of being able to project these things outwards, but every 
time that you have a second line, you always have to see that you are going to be challenged in that 
process. Anybody who is projecting out is going to meet a very strong challenge coming back at them. 
The 33rd gate, because it is the gate of privacy, is the gate of being closed in, in that sense. That is, being 
closed in a room, or somebody that is forced to go into retreat by being sent to jail or by ending up in a 
monastery, or retreat through illness and states of paralysis. In the second line, you see people that are 
locking themselves up in a room and, when you get to the fifth line, you can see that the outside world 
will lock you up in the room. 

33.3 Spirit 

With the third line, we reach the end of the lower trigram process. Here the bond that is being made and 
broken is the bond of privacy. These are people that will naturally seek out their privacy, that is part of 
their process, but it will not be like the second line which is just focused on that. In the third line, there is 
the beginning of the recognition that there is the other. It is the beginning of that process. It is not really 
there until the fourth line. In the capacity to adapt is the recognition that one has to come out of the 
privacy when it cannot just be held back inside. 

The attitude that turns retreat into victory. The victory comes after the reflection. This is the whole 
beauty. The weakest point is at the end of the experience. The power comes after the reflection and then 
the real value of the remembrance can bring about victory, the completion of this process. 

Jupiter exalted. The responsible and principled retreat based on preservation, but with the determination 
to persevere. In other words, "Yes, leave me alone now. I have to think about all of this but I'll see you 
tomorrow." This is not "Leave me alone, I never want to see you again." This is the other side of this line 
with Mars in detriment. A lack of responsibility in retreat. The bridge burner. "I have reflected on all of 
this. I never want to have anything to do with you again. It's over." These people go into retreat, reflect 
and break whatever the bond was. This is the kind of person that says "Leave me alone now. I want to go 
home and think. I will see you tomorrow." The next day, they will call you up and say, "I don't want to 
see you anymore, I have thought about it." In other words, they can just simply break the bond at that 
point. 

This line is called Spirit. The spirit that lies within the whole nature of Retreat is that these people are 
essential for us. If these people do not tell us about the experience, we don't learn. So, there is also a part 
of us that is trying to get them out of that retreat so that they share their secrets, their reflections, with us. 
After all, this is a collective gate. There is a lot of pressure on these people to share what it is that they 
have inside of them. 

In the white book: Privacy as a path to success; or A drive for privacy that will cut off its relationships, 
often abruptly. All of this is due to the nature of reflection. These people know that they have to go into 
retreat and they know that they have to reflect, but the moment that the reflection is not positive for them, 
it is very easy for them to break off the contact. These people can be disliked for that. There is the 
moment where they'll cut you off and you don't get access to their remembrance, to their experience, 
anymore. 

33.4 Dignity 

Remember, you are dealing here with a collective channel, a collective process and identity. The 
collective is rooted in sharing and when you get to the upper trigram, you get to the transpersonal lines in 
which they are very much aware that there is a harmonic gate at the other side. The harmonic gate to the 
33 is the 13, the Fellowship of Man, the gate of secrets. There are secrets in the 13 that the 33 can be 
aware of and recognize that it has to get access to these secrets. When it gets access to those secrets 
through reflection, it can then reveal them. The fourth line of the 33 is as close as you come to finding a 
line that is religious. I did not say spiritual and I did not say mystical, I said religious. 

The whole abstract process is rooted in belief and this fourth line, which is about externalization and 
about being onetracked, is called Dignity. A lack of turmoil in retreat. 

Pluto exalted. The underlying faith in resurrection that turns retreat into an opportunity for renewal and 
regeneration. 

This is the kind of retreat where people say, "I have to go and meditate. I have to go and be silent in order 
to be empowered." In that silence or in that retreat, they seek out that power in order for them to feel 
better about what it is that they have gone through as an experience in life. 

But the terminology itself (renewal, regeneration, resurrection, all of these processes), when you get to the 
Neptunian detriment: Without the guiding light of resurrection, the inevitable dissolution that leads to 
degeneration. These people are very fixed on being able to see that what they can reflect on can truly be 
of value. They understand that they have a responsibility, genetically speaking, to be a witness. There is 
an aspect of them (see the resonance to the first line, first principle: avoid the outside) that needs this deep 
reflective process in their life. They will be the kind of people that get involved in all kinds of different 
levels of meditation. 

In terms of the white book: The healthy retreat for regeneration. "I need to get away from everything. I 
need to go through my process and I think things out, and I need to make sense out of my life." This is a 
common attribute for these people. If they can't make sense out of their life, out of that process when they 
are in retreat, unless they have faith, they are going to get depressed. Unless they have faith, they will feel 
like the whole thing is just a waste and they can become very sad people. 

These people really need some cosmic level of hope, even if it is not true, that the time in their aloneness 
is of value for them. They will seek out formulas for that like sitting in a church on Sundays, getting 
down on their knees on Fridays, going up on the Himalayas on any given day. All of these rituals are 

there to go through this process of being separate and at the same time, in stillness, with the hope that, in 
this quietness, somehow life can be resolved. 

33.5 Timing 

You know that the fifth line operates in a wave that we call 'the seducer and the seduced.' So it is all about 
seduction. It is one of the things to recognize about the nature of all fifth lines: they all are deeply related 
to the question of timing. This line personifies that in its name. This is the line of timing. 

The fifth line is always getting projected on. So, in that sense, they are getting projected on that they are 
the seducer, but because of the projection coming from the outside, it does not mean that they are ready to 
fulfill that projection at the time when the projection is there. There is always this pressure of the fifth line 
where there is this projected field on the outside which is trying to pull them into some kind of response 
that they may or may not be ready for. 

If you have a child with the 33.5, you have a parent that says, "Why don't you stay in your room and play 
by yourself and close the door?" It is being projected on that child that he or she needs that privacy and 
that withdrawal. This is a projected field, and a lot of 33.5 children get locked up in their rooms very 
often. It is projected on them that they need to be alone and private. Due to this projection, it is even 
projected on them that they are not really social, or capable of it. 

Timing. Pluto exalted. As important as the timing itself is the ability to keep secret one's intentions until 
the appropriate moment. This is the magic: that remembrance can bring in the right timing. Everything 
about this process is about reflection: going through it and completing it, and only then the capacity to be 
able to act on that and verbalize that, as in this particular case. What that means is that, until the reflection 
is done, you cannot give in to the pressure from the outside. You can't. Only in the right moment, only 
when the reflection is done, then you have the power to universalize that reflection. 

In the white book: The ability to keep one's intentions secret. You keep the secret until you know. In other 
words, the reflective abstract person is always at risk when they try to involve others in that process 
because they do not have their own opportunity to go through it and see it clearly. They can only express 
themselves when they are ready. 

Jupiter in detriment. A tendency to want others to participate in the selection of the timing, which can lead 
to confusion. In the white book: Without a sense for timing, letting others in on the secret prematurely 
with resulting confusion. Let us say that you are reflecting on how you experience your work, day by day, 
and you recognize, as you reflect each day at the end of your work, that you really do not like your job. 
Day by day, each reflection brings you closer to that point where you are really clear about that. "This is 
not a work for me. I have reflected on that. I am clear about that." At the moment that you are really clear, 
you can quit your job, but only at that moment. That is the exalted. 

The detriment works in another way. You have this ongoing process on reflecting about the quality of 
your workplace and you do not like it. Then you start talking to somebody that you work with and you 
say to them, "You know. I don't really like this job and I am really thinking that maybe this is not for me, 
and maybe I should do something else." In that moment of seeking out somebody else's reflection, 
experience or guidance, in that moment anything is possible. That person can have a friend who needs 
your job and can go to the boss and say, "Louise is not happy. She is thinking of quitting." Louise goes 
home that night, goes through her reflective process and realizes, "I really do like my job. I just have bad 
days." She comes into the office the next morning and the boss comes over and says, "You are fired. We 
do not like to work with people who hate their job." Whether this event is good or bad for Louise is open. 
This is not about a moral question. This is simply about mechanics. 

There are going to be these people who will always let others in. They just do. Sometimes that will be 
very confusing and sometimes that confusion will work its way through. It is not about whether this is 
good or bad. It is just about recognizing that that is the mechanic. To recognize that something is a 
mechanic is in order that you can come to grips with accepting yourself. If you are somebody that cannot 
get to the point where you have the right timing and you know that that timing is going to be disturbed by 
others, at least, you can see that that is correct for you. It is not about changing it. It is about recognizing 
what is correct for you. The moment that you recognize that that mechanism is you and correct for you, 
the moment you surrender to that, you will find out what its value is. It is not without value. It is just one 
of many ways in which this reflective process works. 

33.6 Disassociation 

We get to the sixth line, to the transition line. The formula for the sixth line is that they are not necessarily 
going to be fulfilling the potential of the gate. There is something that is of greater importance to them 
because the sixth line is not simply transpersonal in the sense that it understands the harmonic gate; in this 
case it knows the secrets of the other end. It is more than that. It wants to see the whole complete circuit. 
It wants to see that the reflection covers everything, so that, out of that reflection, the proper remembrance 
can be established so that humanity can be guided. After all, this is at the root of what we call history and 
philosophy. All of this information, all of this capacity to be guided by past experience, so much of it is 
rooted here at the end of this abstract process in the 33rd gate. 

We have a line here of Disassociation. The ability to let go. This is a kind of withdrawal in which the 
retreat can be so complete that these people can walk through the world and be totally disconnected from 
it. The nature of reflection can be nothing more than an ongoing personal process because no reflection is 
really of value to the totality unless it can be a reflection that can add to the experience of humanity and 
humanity will accept that as a way to see themselves. 

In the white book: The ability to let go in retreat, to enjoy privacy. These people can enjoy privacy for its 
own sake and feel no pressure to be brought out of their privacy. They can be private all the time. These 
are the kind of people that are private when they are public or when they intimate. They can always be 
private. These are people that will always hold things inside of them because there is no sense in 
revealing what they remember unless it can make a contribution to society. 

We have this funny twist that goes in the abstract. It is very beautiful. When we are looking at the 56.6, at 
the abstract belief process, "I can stimulate you with my belief," we see that it goes to the 31.1 which is 
the gate of Influence, the gate of saying "I lead," or "I do not lead". So it goes from the abstract 56.6 to the 
logical leadership. Here, in the 33.6, the very next line is the 7.1. The 7 and the 31 form the channel of 
logical leadership together. In other words, both aspects of the abstract process, both the mental process 
and its identity, what they really want most of all is that it is just not another idea. That it is just not 
another experience. That it can be of value to guide humanity into the future. 

Human beings always want to be what they want. Logical people want to be able to reflect on the past, 
and abstract people want to be able to project into the future. Here, in this Disassociation, there is the 
capacity to simply just let go of all that because, unless that you have a reflection that is going to guide 
humanity and lead them, it is not worthwhile. 

I am born into a generation that has Pluto in this gate. I have my design Pluto in 33.6, in Disassociation, 
this letting go completely. I lived for three and a half years totally alone and wild without any sense or 
need to go back in. Not only that, but with all the information that was going on inside of me, there was 

no need to share it with anybody because, at that point, it just did not seem to be something to give to 
humanity, not that I was thinking in those terms. 

The reality is that when you get to the sixth line, there is this "Why should I bother? Why should I trust in 
this?" And as we see, the logic is trying to go to the abstract to see that its projection into the future can be 
experienced and recognized for its value and the abstract wants to project into the future and wants 
everybody to know that its experience can really be of value to the collective. This is this twist that goes 
on in the collective process. 

Every sixth line carries within it what some people call a potential for satori, or transcendence. We have 
many words for that. All sixth lines are about that. What that really means is that the sixth line has much 
tougher criteria for living out its nature than the other lines. In other words, it is much more concerned 
with larger principles. As such, it can end up being transcendent, wise and of value to society as a whole. 
But, being what it is, the vast majority of human beings never really get to live out their sixth lines. They 
tend to be the opposite of what the hexagram says. An enormous amount of arrogance is projected onto 
people with sixth lines from the outside. You can see that in the 44.6, in the nature of aloofness. There is 
this sense that they are not really participating. 

If you hook into somebody's sixth line in an electro-magnetic connection, it is not like hooking into any of 
the other lines. You do not even know if they are really responding to you. They may. They may not. It 
depends on whether the hookup that they get from you can go beyond into many other things. I never 
have seen a design that did not impress me. I am not saying that to be quaint. This is the nature of what it 
is. The fact that we all do not live out what we are is another story. Very few people live out the potential 
that is there in their design. They live out the potential of their conditioning. Not only do they not get an 
opportunity to live out the true nature of the 6, they do not even get to live out themselves first. You can't 
get there anyway. It is quite a process. A 33.6, at the end of their reflection process can say, "Never 
again!" as a kind of value for humanity. 

HEXAGRAM 34 THE POWER OF THE GREAT 

When you from the 14.6 to the first line of the 34, you step into another process, but it is a continuing 
process, in that sense. The 34th gate and the 20, the 40 and the 37, and the 23 and 43 are the three 
oppositions in the zodiac that form definitions in the Rave chart. You are dealing with a high level of 
commonality here. In other words, there is a greater abundance of those six gates because they happen 
more often in the polarity of opposition of Sun/Earth and Nodes. 

This 34th gate of Power is an extremely complex gate; it does not just look for one thing. It has three 
different ways in which it can go and it is a very intense power field. The 34th gate, due to its 
commonality, has a very special value, like the 3rd gate. The 3rd gate tells us about the nature of what it is 
to be alive. 

The nature of confusion and that the transcending of confusion leads to order. This is the nature of life, 
but the 34th gate speaks of the energy for survival itself. It is one thing to be alive, but it is another thing 
to die. The 3 is not there to keep us alive. The 34 is. It is the nature of the 34th gate to enhance our 
survival of individuals. It is literally there to fuel life itself. The power to individuate comes out of the 
34th gate. 

34.1 The Bully 

When you look at any gate, the first line speaks for its nature. The nature of what it is to empower 
survival, the basis and foundation of empowering survival, is to be a bully. Above the lines it says: Power 
is only great when its display or use serves the common good. 'Its display...' Power people never have to 
use their power all the time; they can show it. If you watch animals confronting each other because they 
have a conflict over territory, they put on an incredible show. Listen to two cats arguing over who belongs 
in the backyard. This is an incredible performance of display. There is no real power being used. The 
power is secondary. Someone who has the 34th gate in an undefined sacral center is not the kind person 
that will be able to push their power out all the time. 

The Bully. The indiscriminate use of power. Saturn exalted. The less negative, the resort to power as a 
manifestation of frustration. To stay alive is a frustrating process because it is an ongoing, moment by 
moment, day by day process. You can have a job and feed yourself today, but if you do not go to work the 
next day then you give all that up. How will you survive? It is an ongoing process of releasing that power. 

Pluto in detriment. The comeuppance that is the inevitable destiny of the bully. In order to survive you 
have to be able to show your power. If you don't do that, you will only stay alive out of the generosity or 
kindness of others. Don't bet on it. You have to live out your own power to stay alive. 

The energy to display power as a response to frustration. The frustration is all about: "Don't get in the way 
of my survivall" We are here to be able to survive alone. That is our nature. It doesn't matter whether you 
have the 34th gate or not. You get it all the time from other people or transits. 

The ever present risk of retaliation to power displays. This line does not say: use power. This is the 
indiscriminate display of power. It is not the use of power. The bully does not really have to do anything 
to you other than scare you. The 34. 1 realizes that it has this power and it knows that if it does not show 
this power, it will be difficult for it to stay alive. This is the whole thing for human beings to understand. I 
meet so many people who, through conditioning, have been made weak. I am a pure individual and I ride 
this wave of how wonderful it is to be empowered and alone in the survival of life. How difficult it is for 
people to show their power. How difficult it is for them to see that there is somebody in their life that isn't 

good for them and they do not have the power to defend their survival and say, "Please, I cannot survive 
with you." People who have jobs that they hate and do not have the power to say, "I cannot do this. This 
is not for me." 

The 34th gate goes to the 57. It goes to the creation of the archetype for survival, to be alive as a human 
being. The fear of the 57th gate is the fear of tomorrow, the fear of consequences, the fear of what can 
happen to us. It is so important to understand that the very basis of power is display. In the animal world, 
display works most of the time and conflict is generally avoided and survival is ensured. Somebody 
usually backs down and it is over. This is the beginning of the use of power. It is not about violence. It is 
about the display of one's power to survive on one's own. After all, this is individual. 

The 34 and the 27 are the only gates of the sacral center that are pointed at a functional awareness. As we 
go through the lines of the 34, -)lease understand that there are so many different variations of this. The 
34 connected to the 20 is always displaying heir power. This is part of their doing. The 34 connected to 
the 10 has a totally different process because it has to do with the empowerment of their identity. The 34 
and the 57 is another process. 

So again, we are looking at the basis of this as energies, but how it actually works out in someone's chart 
is dependent on what is the nature of their integration system and how is this working in that 
configuration, not simply what it is in the gate itself because again, there are so many different qualities at 
work. When the 34 is connected to the 57, the power is aware. An aware bully is very different from an 
unaware bully. The awareness about what it takes to survive. "I know what it takes to survive," is 
different from the blind need to survive. Please understand that you have to take into consideration the 
way it operates in the actual design. 

34.2 Momentum 

When you come to the second line, they project outwards. The first line is not what you think. The first 
line is not the obvious bully. Like all first lines, they can be hidden bullies and if you scratch them the 
wrong way, you will see a display of power. The second line is always projecting out this power. "I have 
the power to survive." In the black book, this is all about victory. It is not about winning anything. It is 
about "I can do it. I can survive. I can be my archetype. I can follow my convictions. I can do what I want 
to do." I mentioned all the other gates in that statement. 

Momentum. Mars exalted. The ability when victory is in sight not to lose perspective. Venus in detriment. 
A tendency to be emotionally carried away by the smell of victory. "My power is bringing me to the 
capacity to survive. I want to use more power." Because momentum is a projected field, these people can 
really crumble. They look enormously powerful because they project out all this power, when underneath 
they are very insecure and very frightened. They need to know that the victory is there, otherwise they fall 
apart. 

The power that grows when victory is insight; or The power for growth limited by impatience. This is the 
negative side. The whole process of being a second line is that you don't really know what is there and 
you have to deal with the consequences of your actions all the time because you cite going to be found 
out. What people say about the 34.2 is, "Their bark is worse than their bite." They bark a lot but they don't 
always bite. 

34.3 Machismo 

We saw that the first line knows that it has power and that it may have to use its power to protect itself to 
survive. Ve know that the second line projects out this power and can be found to be weak inside, a paper 

tiger. When you get to the third line you get to Machismo. You get to the real display of power. 
Remember something about the nature of the third line: it is the adaptive line. It is preparing the ground 
for the transpersonal process. It knows that there is something else at work. Because it is trial and error, it 
will make mistakes in its display of power. 

The indiscriminate display of power. Saturn exalted. The great malefic, where machismo unfortunately is 
invariably backed up by natural and uncontrived power. In the white book: The display of power that 
defines any role. Understand what that is all about. The third line is saying, "I cannot be a surviving 
human being unless power display is part of my role. " These people will look for ways in which they can 
display their power in life to enhance their survival success. In other words, "I will not succeed as a 
businessman unless I am really powerful and display my power." "I will not succeed as a lover until I beat 
up my woman." This is the need to display power in any role to guarantee the survival of their way and 
their conviction. There is a great deal of violence that can come out of this line because it is about trial 
and error. There is a lot of battering that goes on. Children, couples. It is the display of power and, unless 
the mistakes become part of an awareness process, every role gets imbued with this. 

Mercury in detriment. A reasoned and calculated display. The communication of disinformation. "I will 
cut your throat unless you pay your bill." That is not necessarily true, but it frightens. The person that is 
saying that to you is using that power in their role because they will not be able to feed themselves unless 
they get that bill back and they have no way of asking nicely. They have to display their power. It may 
not be true. They may not come and cut your throat but ... pay them, will you? 

It is so easy to take that description and say. "Terriblel" It is not true. There are certain roles that require 
that kind of display of power. Nothing can be done about that. That is the nature of being human after all. 
When push becomes shove, you'd better be ready. This is a competitive field. We are here to survive and 
there are all kinds of competition for survival in the world, on all kinds of levels and the reality is that 
certain roles need to have this power. Otherwise, you can never get to the sixth line, its resonance, and 
recognize what common sense is in terms of what power is really for. Trial and error is a learning process. 

34.4 Triumph 

When you get to the upper trigram, you get to the line of externalization. There is no question anymore 
that the power is there and they know it. They know that they have to put that power out across the 
channel. In this case, there are three channels. It is putting its power out in a very strong way. This line is 
called Triumph. The freedom in absolute victory to unlimited use of power. Victory in this is being left 
alone. Victory is being allowed to survive out of your own power and not being interfered with, not being 
conditioned away from your individual responsibility for survival. 

In the white book: The inherent confidence to use power subtly. These people are fixed in showing their 
power. They show less power the less they are interfered with. If you do not get in their way, you think 
that they are very nice. If you get in their way, they are nasty. If you do not get in their way, they get more 
and more confident as they grow older and these are the kind of people that have a great reservoir of 
power but they do not use it in an uncomfortable way. It is subtle; they know how to manage it. 

If that confidence is broken, and most of the time that happens already early in childhood, the moment 
that there is interference, you get this abuse of power. Then they are pushing harder and harder with their 
power, in order to be able to get that triumph they know is inherently their right. This is also a gate that 
can lead to all kinds of problems. Violence is something that can also be there in the detriment of the 
fourth line. There is always the potential for abuse because people refuse to get out of the way. These are 
people that are pushed out of the way, finally, in that display of power. 

Ego gratification in the unrestrained use of power with impunity, inevitably leading to abuse. This is very 
important, for example, in children coming into the world. We have a whole generation that has been born 
with this Pluto transit. We have a whole generation of children that carry each of these lines, millions of 
them in the world now. They will come into their maturity in the new century. It is very important to be 
clear about that if you have a fourth line child in your life; you have to encourage their confidence by 
allowing them to express their individual process. If you do not encourage that confidence, you will have 
a child that will have all kinds of problems. 

By the way, the abuse in this can be brought out by a parent as a mirror. The parent says, "No, we do not 
do it your way," and they beat the child. You get the whole thing reflected back on the child. It is very 
important to keep in mind whenever you are looking at long term transits, that every day and every 
moment, there are thousands and thousands of children coming into the world with that configuration. 
This knowledge is very important for raising these chile ren so that we have a generation of children who 
have great power (Pluto in 34) with the capacity to work this out ause they have not had negative, better 
unaware, conditioning in their process. 

34.5 Annihilation 

f line is the nature of the hexagram and the fifth line is the way the world looks at it. Everybody projects 
onto thos who carry the 34.5 that they have power. Due to that, they are rarely interfered with. The line 
says Annihilation. The way in which we see that power at its universal level is that it eliminates 
everything. For some people, that is a frightening term. The total annihilation of resistance. It comes out 
of the projection. I have the 57.5 and I have three parts of the integration but I do not have the 34. When I 
was in public school, there was a bunch of guys beating up weaker guys, a typical male trip, but they 
never bothered me. I did not have to do anything. I did not have to put on any scene. The fifth line always 
gets a projection. These people are being projected on as having so much power that you would not want 
to interfere with them because you will get burnt. Like the second line, it can be a paper tiger. Nobody is 
really sure because they are projecting onto that power. 

The resistance to release power other than when necessary. Because the power is already projected on 
them, they do not have to let it out all the time, only when there is interference. This is the kind of person 
where, once they use their power, it enhances their power reputation a thousand times. By the way, if they 
blow it, they really lose. 

The discomfort with the need to always release power. This is something that becomes very difficult for 
the fifth line. This sense of "No matter how powerful I am, no matter how much they project on me that I 
have the power, there will always be some force that will take it away from me by interfering with me." 
You see that, for example, in the paranoia of dictatorships. Everybody is projecting on the dictator that he 
has all of this power, but at the same time there can be a coup d'etat going on underneath. They are aware 
of that and there is a part of them that says, "All right, I have to keep on maintaining the power," and they 
get tired of being in control all the time, of having to control other people to keep them from interfering 
with them. 

34.6 Common sense 

When you get to sixth line, you get to the end of the whole process. If you look at the 20.6, you have the 
line of Wisdom. If you look at the 10.6, you have the line of the Role Model. If you look at the 57.6, you 
have Utilization, all of which talks about the fact there is much more involved in this life than just the 
release of power. These people learn it very early. Like all sixth lines, they are looking to the whole 
circuitry, and individuality is enormously complex. 

Common sense. Knowing when enough is enough. Earth exalted. The good sense when having bitten off 
more than one can chew to spit part of it out. The classic story: You have somebody who gets in your way 
and you are a power person. You want them out of your way and you push them out of your way; you 
punish them in some way. But it does not stop. They still come back. They are still determined to get in 
your way. There is this sense of: "How many times do I have to hit them? How often do I have to put 
them in their place?" You take on this responsibility. You bite into this responsibility of maintaining your 
power so that you can survive, and then you discover, "Oh". 

One of my dogs went out and killed some chickens from my neighbor so I put my dog on a chain for 
about six hours. She was in deep psychic pain about that treatment. Then I realized what I was doing and I 
took her off the chain. My neighbor came back soon afterwards to tell me that my dog was wandering 
around. "If you do not like it, shoot her. I will not continue to use this power because that is not what it is 
all about. There must be another way." 

The restriction of the release of power when one does not have the strength to maintain it. Why keep on 
dealing with all of this? Very often 34.6 people just withdraw. They pull their power away and they 
simply say, "Enough is enough. I do not want to be like this. I do not just want to be able to survive by 
using my power in relationship to others because I know there is much more." You can thank the stars 
that we have a sixth line and its resonance in the third line. This is what people call the beginning of our 
idealism, the beginning of the understanding that we are more than jysf pn animal. There is something 
else than just maintaining our survival. There has to be. 

The lack of restrictions that can sap one's strength. The moment this kind of person constantly gets 
involved in this display of power, they just fall apart. They get very depressed. It is not what they want. 
They see that power is essential but not that it has to be constantly used against somebody else. 
Somehow, there has to be a way, (the example, the Role Model/, in which that power can be used in a 
healthy fashion. It is not enough that it is there. There has to be much more. It goes to the 9.1, which is 
also in the sacral center. As we go around this wheel, we will see how all of these things are deeply 
related to each other. 

HEXAGRAM 35 PROGRESS 

The 35th gate is the gate of life. Out of that gate we have the human experiential way. Rather than having 
a gate that is opened up to a non-motor splenic system (the 16), we have a gate that opens up to the solar 
plex system and its incredible wave and power. 

The 35th gate is not interested in finding out where the energy is. The energy is always going to be there 
at one level or another. They are always going to meet it whether it is defined or not because that energy 
is only one step away. The 35th gate is a primary gate of action. Due to that, there is very little restriction 
on it. 

The 16 and the 35 and their respective channels, are about talent. Logical talent is about repetition and the 
development of mastery. Abstract talent comes through experience. You play 25 different instruments in 
your life because you can never stay with any of them because your life is full of change and instability. 
But at the end of your career, somebody comes to you and says: "What kind of musical instrument do you 
think I should play?" The experiential person has a background, has a talent from experience, to be able to 
give advice. 

The 35th gate is also a gate that is deeply creative, but it is not creative in the sense of repetition and not 
in the sense of being collective in the need for energy. It is creative in its experiential possibilities. 

Above the lines, it says: By design, progress cannot exist in a vacuum and is dependant on interaction. All 
change is dependent on getting access to the solar plex energy, but progress is the nature of this gate. In 
other words, this is the great changing gate. It does not say, "I experiment," it says, "I feel," and usually, 
"I feel like a change." This 'usually' is the conditioning factor. If they do not repeat, they stay healthy. 
They go through the'experience, but'diily once. You make love in a canoe. You don't have to do that 
twice. You do it once, you get the experience and you always know what it is like to make love in a 
canoe. Don't do it a second time because you may drown. If you survive the first time, hold on to the 
experience; put it away in your memory and go on to another kind of experience. 

35.1 Humility 

The first line, the foundation, is saying Humility. The ability to accept rejection. This is the core of the 
change process, of the feeling process: the ability to accept rejection. 

In this acceptance of rejection, you have Venus exalted. The artist that accepts rejection as part of the 
process. You have the word 'artist' here. At the foundation of the experiential way of life is a deep 
recognition that the experiential path is an artistic path. In other words, to live is also an art. How you live 
is an art. How you experience and how you move through experience, is an art. This is a collective 
process and, as such, it goes up and down on the emotional wave and so there always will be this 
dilemma. 

The Neptunian side is: A self destructive reaction to rejection. Loss of worth. In the white book: 
Acceptance of change and rejection as part of the process. This is an ongoing process. Change comes and 
you have to go through a process where the crisis is initiated and, in that crisis, you have to let go of what 
you were doing and go on to the next thing. There are those that are rejected. There is yourself who can 
be rejected because you can bring out that very stimulus in other people. 

On the other side, you have Change and rejection as humiliation. In the artistic sense of the word, what 
this is really saying is that, like the 16.6, what it is looking for is how is the logic going to feel in life 
itself? "I want to be able to feel it. It is not enough just to know what the mathematics of the skill is. I 

want to be able to feel it. I want art and life to be one." Art and life to be one is a deep drive in these 
people. Of course, there is no way in which the abstract creative person can develop unless they go 
through all kinds of change and crisis. Otherwise, they will never have enough experience collected in 
their process, which means that they have to accept rejection and change until finally what they feel and 
how they feel carries with it creative power. 

35.2 Creative block 

When we come to the second line, we come to projection. We saw with the 16.2 that what is projected 
outwards is this Cynicism. When you come over here to the abstract process, what it projects out is 
boredom. This is the great line of boredom. You have to recognize about the nature of this gate, what it 
represents, is that 'progress cannot exist in a vacuum'. So, the vacuum is always there and that means that 
change and that movement through the experiential way is dependent on getting access to the solar plex 
wave. There is always this sense of vacuum the moment that the wave is not there because there is no 
possibility to be able to manifest. 

This line of boredom is called Creative block. Lack of inspiration which stops progress. Venus exalted. 
Attunement with the vagaries of the muse and the recognition that creativity is energy that ebbs and 
flows. The Moon in detriment. The need to take action, however mundane, to overcome the feeling of 
emptiness. The actions being uninspired do not further progress. These are people that get bored. They do 
not accept that they have to wait for the energy to come to them. They won't know that until they are in 
the resonance to the fifth line, which always knows because it gets projected on. It is the paper tiger. In 
not being able to accept that they have to wait is this sense of boredom, of being locked away from having 
any progression. And on the other side, because of the boredom, the moment that any kind of energy is 
available, they jump to fill up the empty space and it does not make them feel good. These people get into 
a lot of unfortunate collective problems because they jump simply because they have been waiting to 
jump. The moment they get the energy, they go. 

Creativity and the muse will always come and go. It is easy to say that to 35.2's. It does not mean that 
they are going to accept it, like all information. 

The other side of that is: The need for change and the fear of stasis. This gate is all about change, after all. 
There is this deep need for change and there is this fear that, if the energy is not there, they can't do 
anything and that life is horrible. These people can really suffer from this creative block and, because of 
that, they can get into a lot of trouble. 

35.3 Collaboration 

If you want to have a wild and incredible crisis, lots of chaos, enormous turmoil and jump around all over 
the place psychically, than hang out with a 35.3 because that is what you will get. Because it is the end of 
the lower trigram process, it is not yet transpersonal and yet, it is a gate of adaptation. What is built into 
this is Collaboration. This is the blind openness to the emotional wave. 

The whole is greater than the sum of its parts. Very beautiful, very nice, this is a wonderful line. Jupiter 
exalted. Benefic encouragement of others that expands personal as well as communal progress. That 
sounds very nice. It is true. They will give anybody with a defined emotion access to their Throat. It does 
not matter, what it is. They will eventually learn, of course. When they get older, if they survive, they'll 
know not to do that so much. But nonetheless, this is something that they can only learn from experience 
through trial and error. So they go through a lot of messy stuff when they are young. 

On the other side of this, Sun in detriment. The need to be the center that ignores the importance of 
others. "I have to have the experience. I need to have this crisis. I need to check this out. I don't care what 
your problem is in it. I have to go through this process." This line is fixed on the change process. One of 
the things to recognize for these people, for anybody that has the feeling stream that goes from the 41 to 
the 35, is that change is natural. Without change, they can't be healthy. Without crisis, they can't move on 
to the next thing. Their crisis is always a question of inexperience. It is all about getting experience. This 
third line runs into all kinds of experiences. 

The ability to bring progressive change into others' lives. By the way, they do because they bring wild 
crises. Because they bring the depth of crisis, whoever gets that crisis really does learn something and 
there is a progress. That is not about bad or good. They can be very exciting people to be around. I don't 
know if you want them in your bedroom every night but they are very exciting people. 

On the other side we have: The need to be the center for progress. They are the ones that are manifesting 
out of the throat. They are the ones that need to be the center of that process, but all of this is simply about 
them blindly being open to the change and feeling process. To manifest this energy makes them feel 
good. They make a lot of mistakes along their way. 

35.4 Hunger 

The third and the fourth lines have a lot of similarities but there is a major difference between them: the 
third line is always open to the solar plex center and always open to the experience but, of course, because 
it does not really understand the other side, it makes a lot of mistakes since it is not always connected to 
the right kind of energy to fulfill that experience properly. When you get to the fourth line, 
externalization, you get to the capacity to recognize what is on the other side. It is a transpersonal line. It 
is called Hunger. 

The whole fixing and direction of this energy is: The insatiable appetite for progress. These people 
constantly need change. Not only that, but they constantly generate the change mechanism because they 
know exactly who carries the emotional energy on the other side. These people can be deep manipulators 
of others in the sense that they recognize who are the emotional people and who they can take that energy 
from and bring it through so that they can get the experience they need. 

Moon exalted. Less severe. Symbolized by the phases of the Moon, the drive may be obsessive when the 
Moon is full, but like the fading of the Moon, the obsession abates. The Moon describes the emotional 
wave. What this is really saying is: it takes a lifetime. There is no short route. Mastery in the logic sense 
takes a lifetime to reward. Mastery in the abstract sense, experiential mastery, takes a lifetime of 
experiences before there is a depth to that experience so that you can share the value of it with others. 
They are people that control the change mechanism and, because of that, they can take advantage of 
emotional people because they can use their energy to manifest the crisis and change that they need. 
Because of that, they can be very unfair to those people. Remember that the collective process is not 
personal. A lot of people get hurt here. This is a channel that is deeply sexual. A lot of people get hurt 
here because somebody wants to make love to a redhead and the redhead thinks it is because they love 
them, but it is simply an experience. It is just collective and it does not really matter. The person that is 
sitting there with the 35 is just orchestrating that "I feel like" and can take advantage of that person that 
has the energy and then be very cold to them afterwards because the collective experience is over. 

In the white book: Change for change's sake. The drive lessens with age; or The drive for progress that 
will ultimately step on toes and lead to recriminations. These people will ultimately run into crisis 
themselves because they will have people in their lives who will often feel abused by them. Of course, in 

those kinds of situations, they will get the emotional crisis and, depending on where the wave is, how 
bright and burning that crisis will be. 

35.5 Altruism 

The fifth line always tells you how the world projects onto the gate. The world projects onto this gate as a 
gate of experience. The 36th gate is the gate of inexperience and the 35 is the gate of experience. So, 
everybody who is looking at the 35th gate and projecting onto it says, "They have the experience. Maybe 
they will share that experience with me, so I can also get it." So it is the 35.5 that is getting this projected 
onto them all the time. They are the ones that have the experience: we project that onto them and then 
they come and hook into it. 

It is called Altruism. The sacr!Rce of personal for communal progress. These are people that have all the 
pressure coming from the outside to bring this outlet of experience to them. Again, like all fifth lines, 
when they are young, all this pressure is being put on them to be the outlet while they themselves do not 
necessarily know the depth yet of what they are themselves. 

Mercury exalted. The principles of interaction and harmony communicated successfully for the benefit of 
the whole. This is their role in life, to open up the way for experience to others. By the way, because it is 
a fifth line and because it is all projected on them, they can be quite hesitant later in life to provide that. 
You can get a taste of that hesitancy in the detriment underneath, which says: Though altruistic and 
cooperative in general, a personal regret that in interaction a greater personal expansion has been lost. 
This is very much like the 16.5. "Yes, I can do this for all the others but I am only giving them the 
experience I already have. What about the new experiences that I need?" 

One of the things that are very boring for this fifth line (remember that the second line, the resonance 
below, is the line of boredom) is that they have all these people that keep on coming to them for that one 
experience they have had, locking them into repeating that very experience for the others when they 
themselves are looking for a new kind of experience. This can be very frustrating for them. The 35th gate 
is always under enormous pressure because it is under the pressure of the solar plex system. So often, for 
example, people with the fifth line are being projected on when they are young and they may not have the 
experience in whatever that thing is at all. Because it is being projected on them and because they are 
connected to the wave, they take on that role of guiding the experience. They can have quite a crisis in all 
that. That is part of the process of these gates pointed at the solar plex. They are always open to this 
unpredictable and very powerful motor. 

35.6 Rectification 

When you get to the sixth line, this line is very clear. When you go from the 35.6 to the very next 
hexagram you will get to the 45, which is the only possessive gate that exists. It is the only pure 
possessive gate that manifests. It is a voice that says, "I have," or "I don't have," and the 35.6, when it gets 
to the end of that process, says, "What is the point of just another experience? What do I have from that 
experience?" So, here we find an aspect in which the only thing that is important is, "Is that experience 
going to have a corrective value in it, that by doing this experience, or going through it, I really do get 
something other than the experience itself?" 

The 35 is a gate of expectation and the 16 is a gate of identification. The 35 is always saying, "If I do this 
and that, I am going to get that. When you get to the sixth line, it says "I have done this and that, but I did 
not get anything except this and that." The sixth line is saying, "What can I get from that experience? 
What do I have from that experience? Is it really going to be worthwhile? What am I actually getting out 
of that experience?" 

Rectification. The energy to correct. Saturn exalted. The process of crystallization coupled with ambition 
that assures timely and effective correction. In the white book: Progressive change that results from 
correction. They will only get into that change if they see that this is a corrective process. I know so many 
abstract people for whom, after going through all their crises, the only new experience that they were 
interested in is a guru or a therapist so that they can go through a new experience that could be corrective 
for them. By the way, that is not saying that it was, but nonetheless, it is the kind of thing that the 35.6 is 
looking for. "I want an experience that is of value to me, so that, at the end of that experience, I have 
really learned something that is going to add to the quality of my life." 

Mars in detriment. A destructive tendency that in its personal application may be the necessary severity to 
ensure correction, but when applied generally will meet with resistance and tend to reinforce rather than 
rectify situations. "No, I am not just going to do that with you. Sorry, I am not interested in doing that 
because I want to do something that will give me something at the end, rather than just having a good 
time. " It is not about whether it will feel okay to do the experience. What is it going to deliver? 

Correction which brings change through severity and even destruction, and will always meet resistance. 
These people can be very heavy because what they are saying is, "Yeah, but if we will work with this 
energy, we will do something that is deep. We will do something important, something that is really 
going to change us. We will do something that will really bring a reward." This is a very difficult thing. 
One of the things to recognize about this sixth line is that they need to know what they have and what 
they don't have. Otherwise, they will have no peace. An example for the heaviness of this kind of 
emotional correction is in therapy, when you have somebody that is screaming in your face in order to get 
you into a different state. 

HEXAGRAM 36 DARKENING OF THE LIGHT 

We come to the Darkening of the Light, to the 36th hexagram. We come to the beginning of our look at 
possibility gates. This is the possibility to release the emotional energy, the emotional wave. The 36th 
hexagram is by far the most powerful wave-releaser that we have. It has a direct access to the throat: the 
channel of Transitoriness, the design of a Jack of all trades, the design of the experiential way, the design 
of gaining experience. 

This is all about the experiential path and this hexagram is enormously powerful in that. When people see 
that it is the gate of crisis, the thing to recognize is the nature of this gate and why there is crisis there. 

This is gate of inexperience. It has been initiated by the 41st hexagram, which initiates the fantasy, the 
beginning of a possible new experience. It finally gets into the solar plex system in the 30 and there, it 
becomes a feeling and a yearning to be able to fulfill the nature of that feeling. When it gets to the 36, that 
feeling is fully conceptualized in the emotional sense of the word. What is there is the readiness, the 
depth, if you will. It is the mirror of the 48 (to attempt the experience and the deep frustration) and it is 
dependent on the presence of the 35 to release it, which puts the 35 under enormous pressure. 

This is the human way. Because it is the gate of inexperience, what happens is that, regardless of what the 
experience is going to be, there is always a point of crisis, maybe a tiny crisis, maybe a huge crisis, but 
inexperience always leads to that. You can't help but make mistakes when you have never tried something 
before. You have to be very lucky to avoid that. In that sense, this is the nature of crisis here. 

The awareness and power to generate a feeling or not: this is the energy to generate a feeling, to generate 
it outwards to drive an experience. In sexual terms, this is the gate of sexual penetration. This is the gate 
where you have to do it. By the time you get to the 36, you have to do it, whatever the experience is. You 
have all this energy built up in you so that you are prepared for it at any given moment. The change can 
be so sudden, in that sense. 

This awareness possibility is the hunger wave of hope and pain. Here, the frustration is very powerful. I 
must penetrate this experience. I must have this experience. This is the energy that is there and, of course, 
when you are hopeful it is like "Yes, I get it." When you are full of pain it is, "Why can't I get it?" and the 
frustration that comes with that. What usually happens is that what you can't get from one source, you 
usually give to somebody else. It is not personal after all. This is the classic story of someone who is full 
of desire and they go looking for their lover and their lover is not home, and they find another one in the 
bar. This is strictly impersonal. This is simply about living out the experience. If there is nobody there for 
that experience, there will be someone else. That is why crisis is so common in this. It is not personal; it 
just pops out all the time. 

Keep in mind that the 36 is exactly opposite the 6, which generates the motor, and the 36 is its mirror. 
Nothing generates a wave like the 36. It is quite an expressive thing to see it in motion. 

36.1 Resistance 

When you come to the first line, you come to the foundation and the line of introspection. More than 
anything else, all first lines, if you look at them, are very clear about describing the intrinsic nature of the 
gate. 

Above the lines it says: The rule of cycles in which decline is a natural but not enduring stage. 'Decline,' 
in this sense, is the limitation of the inexperience. After all, these people are of enormous value to us. On 
the logical side, we see that we cannot have solutions without experimentation. Here, we cannot make 

sense out of life unless we've had enough experience. It is all about getting the experience. It is 
impersonal and sometimes it can be very painful, but it is part of our human way. 

The first line is called Resistance. Mars exalted. The energy and determination to persevere in the face of 
opposition. The 'opposition' is the limitation. They are looking for the 35. Jupiter in detriment. An over- 
principled resistance that rather than being selective in resistance and thus less at risk, will maintain 
normal patterns and incur opposition. 

In the Book of Letters, you can see how it moves both sides. On one side you have: The emotional power 
to handle crisis. The 36th gate is about that. These people always handle their crisis. It is the other that has 
problems with the crisis. They both have a crisis, but the 36th gate cruises through it and the other person 
has a shattering experience. It is very good for them. By the way, it is an ancient end-of-the -wheel gate. It 
carries a lot of wisdom in that experience. So, every time you get shattered in crisis, there is something to 
be learned. There is a new birth that can take place. 

By the very nature of the hexagram, they are equipped to handle the crisis, but on the other side: A 
resistance to change that will always bring crisis. On the other side, they realize how much that crisis 
causes havoc. The people with the 36th gate that are part of my life are so aware of how much crisis they 
have brought. They know that. There is a part of them that says, "I really did not have to do this thing 
because I am sure that it will lead to problems. Better I leave this." You can't do that until you have 
reached your midlife point. There are only few exceptions. After all, the 35/36 is a mirror of the 16/48, 
and they are both about talent and talent takes time. In the logical process, it takes repetition and depth, 
and in the abstract process, it takes a great deal of experience and fortitude to survive the crises and keep 
on going on in the experiential way. Slowly in their lives, they begin to recognize that not only do they go 
through crisis, but they can generate a great deal of crisis. Later in life, they become much more selective. 
This is the maturing process that is built into this hexagram. 

Remember that it is the last hexagram in the wheel before you come to the 25, the alpha and the omega. It 
is both Pisces and Aries. So, the 36 is completing a process. Without going through crisis and without 
getting to the experience, we do not get to the next experience. We do not start again in the wheel, being 
innocent. The 36.6 will lead to the 25.1, to the beginning of an initiating process, to the innocence, to the 
start of a new cycle. It is a very important energy. It simply means that there are wounded ones along the 
way. 

36.2 Support 

When you come to the second line, you come to the line of projection. These people can be quite 
something. They are not introspective. They can come up to you and out of the blue they say the most 
outrageous things. "I think that you need a good love affair." They are really quite accurate in all that. It is 
very uncomfortable to have them explode on you in their wave. 

Support. Assistance to others in times of decline. They really are. This is not to be misunderstood. They 
are of enormous value but they do cause havoc. They just project out that quality exactly at the moment 
where you really do need it. They can generate a terrible crisis in that moment. They are very good in 
bringing out crisis in other people, which is quite healing. 

Neptune exalted. The application of imagination to schemes which benefit others. In the Book of Letters, 
it says: Feelings that can benefit others in times of crisis. Otherwise, they are a pain in the neck. In times 
of crisis, they are perfect. They will get it out of you. You will go through that experience and you will 
get it. They know that you need the experience. Even if you don't, they know. That is the whole thing to 
understand about this gate. The nature of this gate can be seen in the Espionage line. They have a sense 

of, "Aha, they need it." Here in the second line, this is the beginning of this power, to recognize the 
moment to bring that force into somebody's life. By the way, at the same time, they get their experience. 
They are great in initiating that crisis so that they can get the experience. "I knew that they needed it." It is 
not personal, but it can be deeply beneficial. This is the nature of crisis. The whole abstract process is 
about beginnings and middles and ends, and crisis is just the path along the way. 

When you get to the other side, Moon in detriment. The more practical and individual assistance but only 
when unavoidable and not as a general principal. That is, Selective assistance in times of crisis. They 
don't always do it. They don't always get you at that moment. Sometimes that is very cruel and brings its 
own crisis. Crisis is necessary for us to develop our experience and the moment we stop seeing crisis as 
something that is bad instead of seeing it as something exciting, it is all about making life exciting. I have 
a lot of 35/36 people in my life. They are hilarious. They need that excitement. They have to have it. For 
them, a crisis is great. They crank it up to a higher level and everybody is blowing up around them and 
they are fine afterwards. They tell others "You all needed that. You deserved it. If I did not tell you, 
somebody else would. " 

36.3 Transition 

The third line, the upper part of the lower trigram, is a line of adaptation. It is called Transition. It says: 
The point at which decline has exhausted its power. These people are very different from the second line 
people who can generate the crisis exactly in the moment and the crisis really is for the other person. By 
the time you get to the third line, you are interested in the recognition that you have to deal with what is 
on the other side of the channel. What happens to 36.3 people is that they always get the big crisis. The 
others get a little crisis and they get the big one. 

In the second line, it is the other way around. The third line people have to deal with the phenomena of 
the change that takes place. There are the ones who really meet the change, which affects them more 
deeply than it affects the other. Remember that this channel is social in its very nature, like all collective 
channels. Therefore, this is a social enterprise of sharing. In that sharing, they are the ones that have 
difficulties with the change that takes place. 

Pluto exalted. The ability to establish a new order out of the ashes of the old. That means that the change 
deeply affects them. What they thought they were, what they thought that they felt, they get the crisis 
because, suddenly, they realize that in the adaptation to the other, something totally different has 
happened to them in their experience. Out of that, they have a whole new process to go through. 

Jupiter in detriment. The tendency in renewal to try to assimilate the remains of the old order into the new 
with the risk that it may rise against the new order once it has regained its strength. These people did not 
really want that change, they only wanted the experience and they got something else with it. When you 
make love to someone and they get pregnant, you did not want all that. You just wanted the experience 
and, all of a sudden, they have to deal with it and they end up with the crisis. This is something to keep in 
mind about the nature of the third line. 

Here in the Book of Letters: The emotional depth to endure crisis and embrace change. The change will 
always come for these people. They are forced to adapt. 

The embrace of the change but with feelings that won't let go of the past. Resisting the nature of the 
change. You can hear these people say, "I wish I hadn't done that. Why did they make me do it?" 

36.4 Espionage 

We come to the fourth line and we begin the process of the upper trigram. The fourth line is about 
externalization which has a narrow field to it. It is fixed; it has this one-pointedness about its nature. The 
moment that you get into the upper trigram, you get into the social context. After all, we have a collective 
circuit here which is social by its very nature. Its keynote is to share and, by the time you get to the upper 
trigram, what you are looking towards is the other side. The fourth line is about mastering the nature of 
the other. This line is deeply perceptive of the other. They are interested in getting their change and in 
fulfilling their experience and their one-pointedness is that they can only do that by knowing the other. 
That knowing of the other can be beneficial or detrimental. It depends on the perspective, whether you are 
the spy or you are the victim of the spy. You notice, by the way, that the third, fourth and fifth lines have 
Pluto exalted. 

This line is called Espionage. The ability to prepare for and anticipate decline through the accumulation 
of secret or privileged information. I have met so many people that have an astrological background who 
are deeply interested in the patterns of others, working out exactly what they are. 

In the Book of Letters: The realization that knowledge, both covert and esoteric, is necessary if one is to 
be prepared for crisis and change. What happens to these people is that their crisis is that they are always 
busy looking at others and not seeing themselves. They get their crisis when they have to see their own 
mirror, but they have a real gift of looking into the other. 

Here, you find the Moon in detriment. The tendency in recognizing the strength of the opposition to 
accept the inevitability of decline and rather than resist, to offer one's services to guarantee survival. The 
double agent. This is where their gift pays off in blackmail or in fees. Crisis knowledge that is available to 
others for a price. That price can be money or a piece of flesh. It depends on the circumstances. The one- 
pointedness of the line is that this is all about knowing the other. Anybody that comes to me with this 
line, the first thing that I tell them is, "You'd better learn about other people, to understand how they 
operate. While you are doing that, don't forget to learn about yourself. You'll save yourself an enormous 
crisis that way." 

36.5 The Underground 

Fifth line, universalization. \% get to the sum total of the nature of this. It is called The Underground. 
Pluto exalted. Perfected survival regardless of conditions. These people will get their experience, and they 
will survive it. That does not mean anything about others. They are here to get their experience. When 
they are really of value for others is when they have been through enough experiences. 

Immunity to crisis as both generator and survivor. In other words, no matter what their situation is, they 
can always move from inexperience to experience and always will, and damn the consequences. They are 
out there to get their experience. This is nature of what this hexagram is about. 

When you get to the other side, Mercury in detriment. A nervousness that can lead to self-betrayal. They 
can get very nervous because they know that the crisis is coming. They can feel it coming and sometimes 
they can let it go without getting their opportunity to go through it because what they want is the 
experience at the other end. By the way, these people end up being either fascinating or deeply boring. If 
they do not have an interesting life, what they tell you over and over again will drive you crazy. 

Self-betraying nervousness in times of crisis. They know when the crisis is coming, they want to 
participate in the crisis and, when sometimes the excitement is too much for them, they let it out. When 
they do so, my advice to these people is, "Don't take a contraband across borders." That is a metaphor for 
many things. These people are probably the most honest people who create crisis. Sometimes, their 

honesty gets them into trouble. They are the kind of people that will confess to someone and get 
themselves into trouble and have a crisis. They are inherently honest in that. 

36.6 Justice 

Now we get to the sixth line, the line of transition, the top of the house. The 36.6 is looking towards the 
25.1. That is the next hexagram, the next line. The 25.1 is about selfless and motiveless action. All of this 
is deeply manipulative. This is depth, after all; we are looking at the mirror of the 48. It is an emotional 
depth and understanding of the other operating in the wave but it is still an emotional grasp of the other 
and, because of that, there is so much built into the crisis that looks like it is manipulative. 

What they are looking for, in the end, is action that is without motive. "I don't have to do this to get that." 
The 35/36 is the channel of expectations. If I do this and this, I will get that. Then you'get to that and you 
realize, "Shit, I have to start again," and on and on. This is an ongoing process. Expectation leads to 
frustration. These people can get deeply disturbed by the fact that life does not reward you that way. You 
have to get out of the expectation business. 

This line is called Justice ('just is'). The inevitable survival of right. Change is the only thing that endures. 
The 32nd hexagram tells us that. To go from inexperience to experience is the human way. This is 
correct. Sixth lines are always looking for something else. This is looking far beyond the nature of the 
experience. It is looking for what, in essence, all of this is bringing out in terms of the other side. What 
does the experience or the change lead to? 

Sixth lines can be depressive. These people have seen it all before and they are the ones that are least 
likely to jump at experiences. Like the 59.6, the One Night Stand, they can end up being celibate because 
they do not get the opportunity to see something that is transcendent, transitional for them. The next gate, 
the 25.1, is a spiritual gate. It is a mystical potential. This is where universal love starts. So they are 
looking for something far beyond that. 

Jupiter exalted. The knowledge and attendant faith that the powers of darkness eventually destroy 
themselves. 'Those whom the gods wish to destroy, they first make mad.' Saturn in detriment. A profound 
sorrow and cynicism that is not diminished by the understanding that darkness is self, annihilating. 
'Darkness' is ignorance. Madness looms as long as there is ignorance. Ignorance is the great darkness. 
Human beings need to experience to make sense of what it is to be. We need the evidence. Not everything 
can be evidenced through the formula of the logic process. We need human experience. We need to know 
what it is like to have to go through and do things. 

In the Book of Letters: The correctness of crisis when it arises out of pure feelings. As long as the feelings 
are not pure, they will avoid the crisis. 36.6 people are not the kind of people that you associate with 
crisis. When they do have them, they are huge. They are not crisis people because they are not turned on 
by any old experience. There is always this sense of "What else is there?" 

In the detriment: The sorrow or cynicism that comes with seeing that despite the correctness of the 
feelings, there is always crisis. The deepest crisis is that the crisis goes nowhere, that the wheel keeps on 
turning, that the expectation is never fulfilled. Deep inside, they know that. What they are saying is, 
"What is the sense of just going through this again? Why can't there be something different?" 

One of the great jokes that you will notice in the lines through the circuits, particularly in the collective, is 
that all the sixth lines in the logic want to be abstract and all the sixth lines of the abstract want to be 
logical. The logic has this tendency to say in the end, "Does this make sense?" and the abstract has the 
tendency to say, "Is it really true? Is it a fact?" It is where they meet. The collective process is inside of 

us. We need all of those elements together. This sixth line can get very depressed due to its very nature: to 
be able to go through change to evolve, to continue this human process. 

They are the people that are the strongest believers and the strongest desirers of the world coming to an 
end. They stand up and say, "I hope it will all come to an end." I know a number of people who have that 
line and when Jupiter was struck by the comet Shoemaker Levy, they had this big grin on their faces. 
"Oh, I hope it will come to an end." 

HEXAGRAM 37 THE FAMILY 

We come to The Family and we move into the tribal process. In coming to the 37th hexagram, we come 
to channel of Community, this deeply social channel, a design of a part seeking the whole. This stream is 
about sensitivity. It is about touch. The 37th gate is the gate of friendship and family, the gate of 
affection, the gate of touching and hugging-at a price because, in the tribe, there is always a bargain. 

Here, we have the possibility of who will or who will not provide what is needed. This is the energy, in 
the wave, the potential to recognize who will provide and who won't. That is why I said that there is 
always a price. The 37 needs the power of the ego and it is always looking for it. The possibility here is 
the sense of touch, and the mouth. 

I have the 40. I have met a lot of 37's in my life. They love to hug and kiss me. This is their nature. The 
40 is the stomach and the mouth is at the other end. The mouth is always saying, "Your stomach is always 
full, fill mine." The deepest relationship between the 37 and the 40 has to do with resources, as this whole 
stream has to do with resources. 

37.1 The Mother/Father 

Please remember about the 55.6, the line in the 55 that will awaken to the spirit, its next step is to the 
37.1. That is the transition this line is looking for. The first thing about mutation in the individual, in 
terms of the spirit, is that the first place it has to go is directly into the tribe, into the line of the 
Mother/Father as a mutation into the family, into the tribe itself. 

A position of inherent respect that ensures a focus for the development of guidelines. Venus exalted. 
Harmony is the key to the successful maintenance of relationships. It is only through harmony that the 
beauty and the values of the family can endure. Look, this is a foundation line. There is no polarity. It is 
very straight forward. This is what the family is all about. 

In the Book of Letters: Friendship that is rooted in sensitivity and ensures harmony. It has to be rooted in 
the sensitivity to the legitimate bargain, in the touch. I make fun of the bargain but, please understand that 
it is natural. The thing is that it has to be a clean bargain. All clean bargains are of value. The whole thing 
with the beginning of this process is to recognize that the first thing that the spirit mutation will do is that 
it has to go to the mother and father and it has to be instilled as a value within the family as a guideline. 
This will be its step. 

What friendship is all about is that everything having to do with friendship has to do with sensitivity. 
Sensitivity is a word that simply says resources. The selfishness in the 55.6 leads to the family and the 
resources. 

37.2 Responsibility 

When you get to the second line, you get to projection. In getting to the second line, the projection is 
Responsibility. This is the ashram line. It has Jupiter exalted. The understanding of the principle of 
individual responsibility as the foundation for successful cooperation. That is, "We all do it, but 
everybody does their thing." Whenever people have this line, I always tell them, "You can't be in 
relationships or friendships in which other people are dependent on you because you will always end up 
being the other side of this line, which is telling them what they should do: to be responsible." 

Mercury in detriment. A tendency to point out the responsibility of others. This is a natural ashram line. 
You have all these people in an ashram that are responsible for themselves in the cooperation and you 

have somebody who is on the other side of this line always telling them where they should be responsible. 
You have both sides at the same time. 

The heading above the lines says: The manifestation, macro- and micro-cosmically, of the organic nature 
of communities. This projection is not about family at all. It is about being in the family. It is not about 
being of the family. It is about projecting into the family. This is projection and it does not have the 
introspection to recognize the true guidelines or values, or the nature of the family. It simply knows that it 
has to belong somewhere in order to get its resources. 

37.3 Evenhandedness 

When you get to the third line, the end of the lower trigram, you get to line of adaptation, to the line of 
bonds being made and broken, to the wave of allegiance and rejection. So we know that in that sense 
there will be an irresponsibility in relationship to the nature of the family. 

It is called Evenhandedness. The success of any group is dependant on maintaining order. Jupiter exalted. 
The ability to judge what behavior is appropriate and to react in a balanced manner to transgressions. 
'What behavior is appropriate' is the behavior that will bring the resources that are necessary. Always 
remember that. So, this is the attempt to adapt in order to make sure that one can get the resources that are 
necessary. 

Mars in detriment. An ironic tendency to either test incessantly the borders of acceptability or to respond 
to the very same tendency in others with severity. All of this is about trying to adapt to a situation in order 
to get to the resources. The rules can be changed in that, remember, bonds made and broken. This is the 
one where everybody has to behave in a certain way and then all of a sudden the situation changes and 
everybody has to behave differently. We have to change the way the family works because the conditions 
have changed. This can be very destabilizing. 

In the Book of Letters we have: The possibility to have the sensitivity to know what behavior is 
appropriate in a relationship. In order to get the resources: don't forget to add that. It is very important to 
keep that in mind. It is not simply about behavior. This is not Grace. This is not behavior to set up a 
situation where mutation can take place. This is behavior that is designed to get a return. It is looking for 
resources. 

The other side: The possible lack of sensitivity to what behavior is appropriate. These are people that will 
change their behavior simply because it is a way for them to get access to resources that they wouldn't get 
behaving the way they did before. They can feel very insensitive to those people that were there with 
them while they were in that behavioral mode. These people can end up being the kind of people that 
other people will complain about. They are always changing or breaking the rules, or they punish you 
because you broke the rules, the very rules that they break. Remember that the 37 is going up and down in 
the hope and pain wave. Add that to everything that we are saying. 

37.4 Leadership by example 

We get to the upper trigram and we get to the externalization, to the one-track. We get to Leadership by 
example. Any member of the family may take on a leading role through exemplary behavior. 'Exemplary 
behavior' is getting the resources. This is so important to understand. The community cannot survive 
without the resources. The 37, which recognizes the principles that is has received from the 19/49 
process, knows that it is its responsibility to attract the ego force that will fulfill those resources. Any 
member of the family can take on this leadership role if they can figure out how to get the resources. 

Moon exalted. The manifestation of highest principles in everyday and practical affairs. The higher 
principles are making sure that the family is looked after. This is not selfish, please understand that. It is 
for the nature of the family. It is selfish in the 55.6, when it is individual. When it gets to the 37.1, this is 
for the family. This is making sure that there is enough for the children to eat; there is enough money to 
build a school. 

Saturn in detriment. A conservatism that generally only accepts the leadership of the father who may or 
may not be a valued role model. 'The father', in that sense, can be the father in the patriarchy and the 
mother in the matriarchy. It makes no difference. It is only about accepting the way to get material and 
the resources based on a traditional archetype. 

In the Book of Letters: The possibility of the highest principles in all relationships resulting in a 
leadership role. The moment that you can provide for your family, you take on a leadership role. There 
are so many families in which the traditional bread winner, the father, is replaced by a child that is 
successful. It is normal in that sense that they take on the leadership role because they have the power. 
The power for the family is where the resources are. 

The possibility of being insensitive to the leadership of anyone other than those accepted by tradition. 
"You can bring more money into the house than the father does, but I will still honor my father instead of 
you. He will tell me what the guidelines are." Remember, at the foundation of the family are the 
guidelines. So, these families come into conflict. The conflict arises between the one that has traditional 
leadership and the one that actually has the pocket book. It is a lot of tension in families. I am not just 
talking about blood families. I am talking about any kind of community, any kind of relationship that you 
have with friends. The situation is: who actually has the role and who actually has the power? The power 
is in the resources. 

37.5 Love 

This universalization line has such a lovely name. It is called Love. Natural and unaffected devotion to 
the family. Always remember that fifth lines are about seduction. This is the great seduction of 
community, family and affection, which is love. This is a nice seduction, isn't it? 

Venus exalted. Natural harmony and perfected sharing. Mars in detriment. Emotional dependency that 
often turns love into hatred. This is an interesting line. When you look at the Book of Letters, you have 
the Venusian aspect which says: Natural harmony and sharing possible through friendship. This is what 
has to be universalized in the family. What is being offered in this 'harmony and sharing' is the non- 
revealed wave that is underneath. This harmony and sharing goes from hope to pain and back again. That 
is not part of the billing. The billing is, "I am your friend. I am affectionate with you. We will have 
harmony together. Can I seduce you with that?" And the other side is saying, "Seduce me with that." Then 
the wave comes along. It will create all kinds of dilemmas. 

The other side is: The possibility of dependency turning love into hate. This is very important. It is milder 
for the person who has it than for the one who doesn't. This is all about the emotions. We can never 
escape the fact that we have the solar plex center here. These people are offering their love and their 
harmony for what the ego will deliver on the other side. If they become dependent on that ego, if they 
keep on offering this perfect affection in order to get their bread and butter, they will quickly develop a 
hate for that ego at the other end. Even more so: these people that carry this line make other people 
emotionally dependent on them. By doing so, they create the potential for hatred in the other person 
because most of those people are undefined emotionally and are being yanked up and down on that 
emotional wave. 

In all this talk of the sweetness of love, you also have to recognize that the family always has its love but 
it is never something that stays at one place. It is always going up and down in the wave. We all know 
this in our families and communities. This breeds all kind of dependencies and it says that this is the 
universalized methodology. This is: "Get them dependent on the emotional wave". Out of this can come 
hatred. Hitler had this line in an undefined emotional center. 

37.6 Purpose 

The 37.6 carries a unique significance. There are six waves of spirituality, the six mystical waves. This is 
a movement that goes from the 19 to the 49, from the 37 to the 40, from the 51 to the 25, and from the 20 
to the 10, the three mystical channels bridged by the 40/37. At the mystical level, the 37 is looking for a 
family that is far beyond the mundane. At the mystical level, it is looking for God. This is a gate that 
yearns for something very profound. One of the extraordinary things about the 37.6 is that it leads to the 
63.1. It leads to After Completion; the 63.1 is about the spiral of life. 

The 37.6 is saying, "What is it all about? Who am I? Where do I belong? Is there something greater that 
this?" After all, it is the part that is seeking to be one with the whole. But the whole is more than the 
family, the group, the nation and the planet. The whole can be transcendent. 

In the 37.6, there is this deep need for God, whatever one wants to call it. Spirituality. To be moved. 
Within the 37, there is this burning question: what is the purpose? What is the purpose of all this work? 
What is the purpose of constantly having to look for the resources? What is the purpose of maintaining all 
this? Is there something greater than all of this? This 37.6 is not just looking for the 40 at the other end. It 
is far beyond that. It is far beyond the community. It is looking beyond all of that because all of that is 
just business, and it knows that. There must be something else than just building temples. There must be 
something beyond all of this material. There must be something beyond just having to feed ourselves. It 
has to be more than just killing to replenish. It comes out of the 19/49. It knows. There has to be 
something that raises us up out of the nature around us. 

This perception of 'What is it for?' is the deepest question within the 37.6. Yearning for that. It is not 
looking to go up to the 21 /45. It is hoping to be able to go the other way so that it can be awakened 
through initiation, so that it can come to recognize the holiness of its nature, not simply to work in this 
plane. 70% of all women on earth spend 50% of their time looking for firewood and water, nowl Think of 
that. What is it about? The nature of the family, in the end, is this yearning for an explanation so that they 
can see that this trivia in this life is somehow substantiated, that it makes sense. 'Micro- and macrocosm.' 
This line is called Purpose. The energy to maintain the family is enhanced by recognizing its values. What 
is it really all about? 

Venus exalted. The gift of not only recognizing the inner meaning of the family but an appreciation for its 
values. Mercury in detriment. A need for diversity that may ignore the achievements of the family in 
favor of withdrawal. These are the ones that leave the tribe and go looking for God. They are the ones that 
go on the road and forget about all that stuff. I guess India is the best place to see them, to see the ones 
that have left their home, that have taken the road to God, whatever they think it may be. 

In the Book of Letters: The possibility of extending friendship through the appreciation of its value. But 
again, for these people, the greatest friendships are the ones that guide them to some kind of spiritual 
sustenance in their life. There are not just looking for food. They are looking for manna. 

On the other side we have: The need for diversity that despite appreciation will prefer casual friendships. 
"We will not get involved with all that. We will be looking for something else, something much deeper." 
One of the most important things for me in the nature of my work is that human beings have an 

opportunity to recognize that there is a purpose. Their purpose is a unique one. Every human being carries 
a unique purpose. I have mentioned that I am working on a project that will describe how we all 
incarnate, logically and precisely, so that every human being can see the intrinsic value of their being. 
Until the family can grasp that, we are not going to have any peace. Everybody needs to know that their 
purpose is fulfilled by being. 

We can only suspend the judgment that compares our lives to this and that when we see intrinsically that 
we are limited and in that limitation is our perfection. All of us together transcend all of that. In the end, 
the deepest cry of the family is 'what, why and how?' They need to know that. That is very difficult for 
them because they are in the wave. The real awakening of the human family will not happen until spirit 
awareness begins to flow on this planet. The foundation of that is to take people through their nature. 

My joy in being able to teach at that level is to bring people an opportunity to see how deeply 
programmed we are. We have no choice. There is nothing you can do about that except see its beauty. It 
is not 'no chance.' It is a beautiful process the moment that you can surrender to the nature of what it is to 
be you. 

HEXAGRAM 38 OPPOSITION 

We come to the individual process: the 38th hexagram, Opposition, the polarity of the 39th hexagram, 
Obstruction. These gates are deeply similar in the nature of their pressure. At the same time, they are 
pointed towards different outlets. The 38th gate is pointed towards the splenic system and this channel, 
the 28/38, has to do with the development of our intuitive processes. The 38th gate is the gate of the 
fighter and the fuel is the energy to struggle or not. This is the inherent energy. 

I always try to stress to the people that carry the 38th energy that the only struggle that is worthwhile is 
the struggle that tells you that life is of value because that is inherently what the struggle is all about, that 
life is truly of value. That is why you have risk-taking at the other end. 

The energy mechanic is the impulse coming out of the format of the 3/60 to ignore. There is nothing more 
exquisite than a 38 ignoring you. They ignore you; they do not hear you. You talk to them and 10 minutes 
later, they look at you and say, "Were you talking to me?" They are in their own process. This is a fuel or 
a pressure -energy of the individual process. 

Above the lines it says: The ability to preserve individual integrity trough opposition to detrimental 
forces. 'Individual integrity.' It is about the value of the individual life, not the value of the collective or 
the communal, tribal life. It is the value of the individual life. If you scratch any seeker, they will all ask 
you the same question, "What is my purpose in life?" At the core, to be individual is this need to 
recognize value in your own life. 

38.1 Qualification 

The first line always acts as a guide to the essential meaning of the hexagram. This foundation line is 
called Qualification. There is something very beautiful in this. This is a fuel, a pressure -energy, which is 
speaking for the whole hexagram and you can see that, right from the beginning, the intuitive process 
carries something that we call psychic phenomena. 

Tempering opposition based on circumstances. Don't always strugglel Don't always fightl The line is 
saying to only struggle and fight for those things that are of value. Otherwise, don't bother. 

Neptune exalted. Nine times in the 384 lines we find a first line, a foundation that has Neptune as its 
exaltation. The foundation of what you fight for is veiled. The very basis of this hexagram is hidden. It is 
hidden in the mysteriousness of mutation and the mutative capacity of anything individual. What is of 
value to fight for can be an enormous mystery in life. Most people don't know. 

A psychic attunement that guarantees proper action. 'Proper action' in the sense of what to struggle for or 
not, when to struggle or not, when to listen or not. 

In the white book: The psychic gift of knowing when and how to fight. Which means, with Neptune here, 
it is just there. That is where it gets its psychic label because it appears mysteriously from behind the veil 
and suddenly, in a noxious situation, where nothing is going on, the 38.1 finds itself engaged and 
struggling. They don't know why because it is a psychic moment. It is coming from behind the veil. 

Mars in detriment. The tendency to oppose as a general rule. This is also the nature of what is inherent in 
Opposition. The drive to fight as a general rule. "Get out of my way. I am doing it my way." The 
individual is not designed to be influenced. This is one of the most important things to understand about 
the nature of individuality. 

Wherever you see an individual gate in your design, recognize that that is an aspect of your nature that is 
not to be influenced by others. That is why, at the core of what the pressure is, it is to be intuitively 
penetrating and aware in the now through the 57/20. But at the root of that, it is to fight anybody that gets 
in your way, right, wrong, or indifferent. The key is: is it really of value for you to fight about that? As a 
first line, this is the true struggle. What is worth fighting for is the great question of the 38. 1. 

38.2 Politeness 

The second line has a very deceptive name; very few people really grasp it. All second lines are about 
projecting outwards but they do not have the depth. This is not a question of what the struggle is or what 
one has to struggle about. This is just a projection outwards that one is a struggler and that one is a 
fighter. 

This projection outwards comes under this title of Politeness. Don't misunderstand this. This does not 
mean that these people do not struggle. It just means that they struggle all the time and it is polite. "Please 
stop doing that. I don't want you to do that anymore. Please." They can drive you crazy with their 
politeness. 

Opposition that does not transgress normal codes of behavior. Pluto exalted. The value of discretion. In 
the white book it says: The energy for the intuitive awareness for discretion. These people try to keep the 
struggle from getting out of hand. They don't want the big fight. They just very carefully coach everything 
in nice polite terms and you know right away that they are struggling with you, but they are polite, so they 
survive. 

Think about what is at the other end. In the 28th gate, we have the fear of death. I know so many 28's and 
38's who have been beaten and robbed in their life. They bring struggle into the world and they get it 
back. The 38.2 knows that and so, they struggle on politely. This is the framework that will lead to the 
universalization in the fifth line: they struggle politely. 

Moon in detriment. An over-politeness that is both servile and obviously superficial and defeats its very 
purpose. These people kill you with their politeness. "Oh, yes I will do this for you." They can drive you 
crazy with the way in which they express it. 

The energy for over-politeness in times of struggle. The fear of dying, the fear of being beaten, destroyed, 
and broken is very powerful in this gate. If you are a fighter, you know what the fight is. The fight is to 
the death. This lies underneath every 38: the recognition that the fight is to the death. The struggle is to 
the death. 

38.3 Alliance 

The third line is a joke. The moment that you understand what third lines are about (bonds made and 
broken, trial and error), the idea that this line is called Alliance is very funny because you know that 
inherent in these alliances is the fact that they will fall apart. They will fall apart because the individual 
ultimately struggles alone. This is the whole thing. 

In the end, by the time you get into the integration system, the one thing that is clear is that everyone is 
alone. Individuals know this intensely. That is why it is so important for them to recognize in their 
lifetime what their individual value is. They know that they are alone and they ask themselves: Is it worth 
it? 

Sun exalted. The ability to sustain through integration with similar forces, thus ensuring the vitality to 
persevere. Please understand what that means. "I am struggling against that person in the neighborhood 
and I will struggle with that person for the rest of my life on my own. If it happens that my next door 
neighbor is also struggling with that person, I will go along with my next door neighbor and we will 
struggle together." That is never really an alliance. It is the alliance in the way in which the English and 
the French army will fight together, but they only do so if they have a common enemy. When they do not 
have one, they will fight each other because that is the nature of the individual. 

In the white book: The energy to integrate with others in times of struggle, as long as it is the same 
struggle, as long as it is focused on the same thing or pointed towards the same thing. 

We have the Earth in detriment. Here you see one of these Sun/Earth polarities. These lines are important. 
Earth in detriment. Selfish alliance which saps the energy of one's partners in order to ensure personal 
vitality. "I am struggling with my neighbor and my neighbor is struggling with my neighbor. I will let my 
neighbor do most of the struggling so I can save my energy. When my neighbor burns out, then I will 
jump in the right moment and finish it off." This is the third line. 

38.4 Investigation 

When you get to the fourth and fifth lines, you get to the inherently social lines. Nothing about the 
individual is inherently social. At the top of the lines, it says: The ability to preserve individual integrity 
through opposition to detrimental forces. The 'detrimental force' is anyone who tries to influence the 
individual. So, when you look at the inherent sociability of the fourth and fifth lines, please understand 
that that is only going to come from an appropriate individual. It will have to come from another 
individual, in essence from the 28th gate at the other end. In other words, individuals do not influence 
each other. They empower each other or not, but they do not influence each other. They empower each 
other to live out their own individuality and, in that, as long as they are empowering each other, a trust 
can develop between the two of them. 

This is the line of Investigation: the single-mindedness, the focus of the individual to struggle for what is 
of value in life. Analysis which strengthens opposition. Pluto exalted. The detective who develops or the 
insider who accepts a joint opposition whose success can only be based on trust. In the white book: The 
energy to recognize who can be of value in times of struggle. 

The 38 is a pressure and the pressure needs to be released. Its natural pathway obviously leads to the 28. 
When a 38 and a 28 have an electro-magnetic connection to each other, in that moment, it is possible to 
align with each other. It is possible to trust and struggle together out of empowerment for each other. That 
"who" is the very important element. Who is that person that you can trust to not influence but empower 
you? This is the key in the fourth line. 

Mars in detriment. The power of adrenaline to provoke aggressiveness. In the black book: The 
aggressiveness in opposition that prejudices investigation and limits trustworthiness. The thing to 
recognize about this line is that these are some of the most aggressive individuals that we have in terms of 
maintaining their individual integrity. The slightest attempt to influence them will get the strongest 
possible reaction because that is what they are here for. Because of that, even another individual can bring 
out an aggressive reaction in 38.4's. We are complex beings. They may meet a 28 who is basically 
collective but they have the 28 to their 38. That basic collective part is not going to empower, but to 
share. It wants to make judgments. It wants to correct. It wants to say, "No, let us not do it this way. Let 
us do it that way. " In that instant, you get violence as a potential because the aggressiveness will say, "No, 
no, my way. " 

What you have here in the fourth line is a very fixed energy on being able to establish if life is worthwhile 
or not, a genetic possibility to recognize who can empower you to fulfill that recognition. Because of the 
strength of this, there is also the possibility that nobody will have it. There is this constant aggressive 
defense against being influenced by the outside. My son has the fourth line twice with Neptune. The way 
in which that comes out is very bizarre. Telling him that he should do something does not work. He just 
does not listen. He looks like saying, "Who the hell are you to tell me anything?" I was sitting in a cafe 
and he was about to go across the street and as he left I said to him, "Be careful." Before he gets to the 
crossing, he turns around and says, "I know what I am doing." He is only five years old. These are 38's. 
Don't get in their way. 

38.5 Alienation 

We will see when we look at the 39.5 as the polarity on the other side, because it is projected on these 
people that they are provocative, that they are basically left alone. The same thing is true when you come 
to this fifth line with its appropriate name Alienation. Remember that the fifth line is how the public or 
the outside world sees a hexagram. So, the outside world sees the 38 as an alienated being, somebody 
who is fighting in their own world, somebody who is really not connected to the rest because they seem to 
be caught up in some kind of struggle about something. This energy is seen as alienating energy by the 
outside. 

A stage in opposition where one is totally isolated. This is the universalization of the pressure to be 
individually intuitive. It is absolutely perfect. The individual is always at their best when they are isolated 
within the aloneness of their own being because they have to resolve everything in life within their own 
context. They are individual. 

Saturn exalted. The ambition and concentration to endure. These are very tough folks. You project on 
them that they can fight and they are there. They are always ready for the struggle. It gets projected on 
them all the time, so they are deeply trained in life for what the struggle can be. 

The energy to stubbornly fight alone. This is their magic, in that sense. Their magic is that they do not 
need to have others with them in their struggle because, in fact, their struggle can be of value to others. 
They are often groundbreakers because they are given the opportunity to struggle for what is really of 
value. They often get to be the people that first discover the value of something because they are given the 
opportunity to struggle. 

Pluto in detriment. Alienation experienced as painful confinement that by its very nature blinds one to the 
possibility that there are those at some point who may come to one's aid. In the white book: The energy 
for stubbornness is so strong that it is difficult to recognize that there are others who can help in times of 
struggle. It is about alienation. Even in its detriment, where there is always this possibility that there may 
be somebody else (after all, there is the 28th gate at the other side), there is still this sense that one is 
always alone. The difference is what all individuals have to live out in their process. They have to go 
through the binary of what aloneness is. This binary of aloneness for the individual is that half of the time 
it is delicious and half of the time it is not. This is what lies in alienation. 

The exalted says, "It is great to fight alone. I only have to deal with my resources, my process, with what 
is of value to me. I don't have to concern myself with anybody else." The other side says, "I have to fight 
alone. Isn't this awful? Nobody will help me. Nobody cares about my struggle. Nobody empowers me." 
They always have this feeling that they have to do it alone. It is true. You have to do it alone. Somebody 
can help you to get to the door but you have to go through the door yourself. The 38 is always going to 
need that doorway of the 28. It cannot be fulfilled by itself. The 38 is only a pressure. 

Remember that how the lines manifest is entirely dependent on the design. Again, you cannot take any of 
the meanings of these lines and project on them until you see them directly in context to the design. How 
they will come out and how they actually operate, that will make the difference. If you have the 38.5 and 
you have no outlet for it, you will feel alienated within yourself because it is so difficult to bring it out. 
Again, all of these lines have to be seen in the context of the design. 

38.6 Misunderstanding 

Each of these gates that come out the root center and point towards the splenic center have very unusual, 
Uranian lines. We will see the 58.1, the Love of life. We will see the 54.4 which is the mystical line of 
Enlightenment/Endarkenment, and here we come to the 38.6. This unusual line is the quality that exists in 
this individual process. The 38.6 has a direct resonance to the 20.6 that is going from the fuel to the 
expression. The expression in the 20.6, in the throat, is Wisdom, wisdom in the now that is of value to 
society and to civilization. The 38.6 is one of the most potentially mutative of all gates in the individual 
process. The only lines that are intrinsically more mutative are the lines that you will find in the 3rd 
hexagram. In other words, what you are seeing here in this particular line is a mutative force. It is a 
mutative force and, because mutation will always bring something new, that mutative force is always 
misunderstood. 

It is so difficult for individuals, even when they have the opportunity at the mental level, to explain 
themselves. When you are dealing with a fuel, with a pressure in the 38.6, there is this fundamental 
knowing of what is worth struggling for or, as is more often the case, what not to struggle for. There is 
always this misunderstanding from the outside because it does not seem to fit into any kind of recognized 
pattern from the past. 

Opposition without basis. Saturn exalted. Eventual crystallization that clears up misunderstandings. 
Eventual'! 

In the white book, it says: Energy which attracts misunderstanding and the stubbornness to face 
opposition. These people know something that other people don't know. They still don't know what it 
means and they don't know how to express it. It is just something inside. They can seem like they are 
fighting for something and nobody can understand why they are fighting and what they are fighting about 
and they themselves often have no idea why they are struggling and fighting. That is the nature of the 
38.6. But there is always eventual crystallization. In other words, because it is a mutative process, 
eventually the mutation can take hold and, in that moment that the mutation gets to manifest, gets 
expressed or generated, in that moment, it is possible to recognize what the struggle has been for. Then all 
those people around them that were struggling with them will let go and the struggle will end. 

When you come to the Earth in detriment, you have: The recognition that misunderstanding is at the root 
of opposition, but the insistence that it is the misunderstanding of the opposing forces. The detriment is 
more mutative than the exalted. It will actually struggle for something and it does not know why it is 
struggling for it for all of its life, despite what anybody tries to tell them, because so deep is that force 
inside that the mutation of knowing is the only way that they will find value. 38.6 people are often 
tormented by the fact that the knowing of others is never a knowing that is sufficient for them because the 
value of life for them lies in a knowing that no one seems to have access to and only they seem to have a 
recognition of, inside of themselves, but do not know what it is. The 38.6 does not fight. They do not 
engage in struggle. Their struggle is all held within because nobody understands them. 

There is a very clear description of this in the keynote. The keynote does not belong to individuality. 
Misunderstanding. The 38.6 is the bane of the collective. They drive the collective crazy. The collective 
can deal with individual knowing that has been around for a while but they have a lot of problems with 

individual knowing that is brand new and cannot be explained to them. So, they are up against the wall of 
struggle that they cannot deal with. 

Again, recognize what the nature of a sixth line is. This line is looking for the quality of the whole circuit. 
In other words, not only is the knowing finally there that gives value to the life; it also leads to the 
awareness that gives life its proper form, its proper convictions and brings it out awake in the now to 
mutate all of society. No wonder that they are misunderstood. How difficult a process that is. For all sixth 
lines in individual gates, it is much more difficult to make any kind of commitment than it is for a 
collective sixth line. A tribal sixth line can be pulled in relatively quickly. The collective takes a little bit 
longer, but to bring in the individual sixth line to get a commitment out of these peoplel It has to come out 
of their unique knowing. 

HEXAGRAM 39 OBSTRUCTION 

We move to the 39th gate and we come to the individual process. Whenever we are dealing with the 
stream of Emoting, whenever we are dealing with this individual stream that operates through the solar 
plex system, we know that this is the stream in which we are going to have the metamorphosis or the 
mutation taking place that will open up the potential to release the spirit consciousness that lies within the 
solar plex system. We know that the event itself is keyed to the 55th hexagram, to the sixth line. Keep in 
mind that the 55.6 is a potential which operates correctly when it is being fueled by the 39th gate. The 
39th gate, as a fuel, is going to make its contribution to this metamorphosis that is going to take place in 
our emotional process. 

The 39th gate is the gate of Obstruction, and it is the gate of provocation. It is the energy to provoke or 
not. In sexual terms, this theme is about teasing. This energy provokes in order to find the right spirit. 
This is one of the gates that could be best understood through the negative. 

That is, provocation is there to find out who can not be provoked. If you try to provoke somebody and 
they are not provoked, that spirit is correct for you. If you can provoke somebody, that spirit is not correct 
for you. The provocation tries to find the right potential for that fuel to feed, to find the right spirit. All of 
that can be very confusing because the 55 is in the wave. What appears to be the right spirit on Monday 
will not be the right spirit on Tuesday. In the archetype of how this gate functions, the provocation is 
there to find the right spirit because, once linked to the correct spirit, there is the potential to emote, the 
potential to bring out the individual spirit and the capacity to bring mutation to manifestation, to bring it 
to everything else. 

The individual is responsible for mutation in the plan. This is inherent in their design. You also have to 
see that there is no metamorphosis of the emotional system other than through the individual process. The 
individual can only have impact on the tribe or the collective when it is truly in the right spirit, what most 
people confuse with the term 'enlightenment.' Most people confuse this pathway with this term. The 
individual mutative force that is in the right mood, this spirit is infectious because it is there to move the 
mutation through the totality. The energy mechanic is the impulse which is rooted in the 3/60, in the 
pulsing energy to eat. It is about what you eat. 

One of my favorite statements for 39's is when somebody comes into your life, imagine if you have to eat 
with them. Would you really like to eat with them? 39's know that better than anybody else. Adults never 
really get that, but if you ask children about the people around them, "Who do you want to eat with?" this 
is very revealing because they tell you spontaneously. 

If you look at this stream and you look at the 12th gate which says caution and meditation in the face of 
temptation, you see that the 12th gate manifests the individual process in the throat. It is the gate of 
caution. It is important to withstand the temptation to do. It is better to meditate and back away from 
acting. In the 39, we find the fuel for this process. 

The heading above the lines says: The value of obstruction in provoking analysis, assessment and 
reevaluation. It is the very fuel for that caution. That is what provoking is all about. Provoking is a deeply 
selective process. It is a very important process. What is so difficult for people who carry this energy is 
that, because they automatically are provocative, and given the nature of the world, they get so many 
people who are provoked by them. Because they are not the right spirit (not everybody is the right spirit), 
these people end up disliking the very value, the very essence of what they are. All of these themes can be 
seen in the first line in the foundation. 

What is successful in provocation once, in terms of the spirit, may not be the next time due to the 
emotional wave on the other side. The 39 people themselves have to recognize why they are provoking. 
The 39 is a fuel, and it is not aware. So, they realize that they provoke naturally, and if they accept that, 
what they are only looking for is for the response of people who are not provoked by them (what I call the 
right spirit). In other words, if you have a certain kind of habit, like if you like to tap your feet while you 
are eating and you have somebody sitting beside you, and every time you are tapping your feet, the other 
person starts going "Ahem." This means that you are provoking them; thus they do not have the right 
spirit. Don't eat with them. If somebody else is there and doesn't mind your tapping, then you have found 
the right spirit. Period. It is not sophisticated. It is simply the recognition that those aspects of your nature 
are provocative to some. Only the people to whom it is not provocative are for you. To provoke 
"efficiently" comes back to your own recognition. 

If you carry the 39 energy within you, you have to recognize that people who are not provoked by you, in 
whatever situation, are right for you in that moment, in that time. They carry the right spirit. They may 
not next time because this energy is directed to the emotional field, to the wave. So, it may work one 
moment and may not work the next. What you do discover over time is who is generally always provoked 
and who is generally not always provoked by you. Then you have succeeded. 

The whole success for a 39 is to keep on provoking. In order to be yourself, you have to be provocative 
with the recognition why the provocation is there so that you are not uncomfortable when people do not 
like your trip. The worst thing for any individual is somebody who says, "I don't like the way you are 
doing that. Change it." This is very difficult for provocative people because they will always have people 
around telling them, "Don't provoke me." This is like telling the sun not to shine. They 39's are what they 
are and that is their beauty. 

So many gates have ways of deeply knowing what is correct for them. It is in their genetics. The gift of 
the 39 is to provoke. Otherwise, we do not have a way to get enough people together who are carrying a 
good spirit. The good spirit comes from acceptance, like in The Troubleshooter; the wisdom of a 39 
saying, "That is where the problem is," this being a provocation. If you are a problem-solver and you have 
people in your life who accept your advice, that is the right spirit for you. If they don't accept your advice, 
they are not the right spirit for you. The Martian people in the 39 try to insist that others respect their 
advice. The key to 39 is to continuously provoke. I continue to shock people. It is my design. You have to 
continue to be what you are. It is just the recognition of the value of these things. Of all people that I 
know, 39's are the most uncomfortable with the nature of their energy because they do not like the 
negative results of their provocation. Too bad; this is the only way to learn. 

39.1 Disengagement 

It is called Disengagement. The basis of provocation is to back away. This is one of the deepest 
provocations of all. Think about what that means, genetically. The moment that the 39 disengages, there 
is no mutation. 

Mars exalted. The determination when confronted by obstacles to withdraw, but only temporarily. 
Understand the nature of the foundation. It is looking inward. It is trying to understand what provocation 
is and, the moment that it provokes, the moment that it is dealing with its capacity to provoke, it always 
ends up in situations where that leads to a reaction and they withdraw, but only temporarily. In other 
words, they will go through it again and again. 

The energy to provoke by refusing to confront obstacles. The obstacle is the resulting provocation in the 
other. Think about that. When you are provoking somebody, you tease them. What you are teasing is that 
you need to get exactly the right potential for that teasing. Not everybody will respond in the same way. 

Those people who will be provoked by that teasing are not for you, but you have to find who is for you. 
Thus, you keep on provoking and every time you meet the obstacle, their response to that provocation, 
you back away and try to find another one. 

You are looking for the spirit. Understand that the 39th gate is a gate that has deep inside of it the only 
instrument that is out there to look for the spirit. When these human beings stop provoking, we have less 
and less people who are looking for the spirit. For every 39, there is a resonance in the world. The spirit 
can be found but it is a research, after all. 

Mercury in detriment. Disengagement, with an accompanying indecision as to when to re engage. There 
is a good sound biological reason why the foundation for this gate which is seeking to find the spirit for 
mutation, is being held back in this disengagement, because we do not want all kinds of mutations in the 
world. Just because something is a mutation, it will not inherently guarantee that it is a good mutation. It 
can be a bad one. A bad mutation is when the 39 provokes someone and they try to stay instead of 
withdrawing when this person gets provoked. Thus, you will have a negative mutation right away and it 
will manifest in the quality of that relationship because it then is contentious, caught in the mood swing 
and the spirit is not there, but only the motor. This is a way of holding back from too many mutations. 

The value of this kind of education is when people who carry the energy of the 39 begin to recognize the 
value of what that gate is. In order to do so, they all have to develop what I call a thick skin. If you 
provoke somebody and they get provoked, you know that they are not for you. They will put up an energy 
vibration that is sent towards you which says, "This person is a provoker and this person is not nice," or 
other gossip told. If people talk about the 39 behind their back or into their face, they do not necessarily 
like that. 

This is the whole thing about being a 39. That is why there are so few people in the world that are truly 
looking for the spirit. Most of them are engaged in disengagement. They are pulling back. They provoke, 
they get the reaction and then pull away. This is what most of the planet is doing with this energy. 

39.2 Confrontation 

The second line is always projecting outwards. The 39.2 is projecting outwards that they are provocative 
and therefore, other people can treat them accordingly and respond, even when they are not provocative. 
What happens to these people is that, because everybody responds to that provocation, they end up having 
to deal with it a lot. 

The second line is called Confrontation. That is what they get. By the way, you can notice that the second, 
the fourth and the sixth line have the Moon exalted. One of the easiest ways of thinking of the Moon is to 
recognize that it is what moves and drives us. When the Moon is exalted, this is a very powerful force 
because we get a constant cycle every 28 days of the Moon coming back to this line and reinforcing this, 
or when it is at the other side of the definition. 

Here, The instinctual and direct assault of obstacles. These people are projected on that they are 
provocative. You are sitting with somebody who is describing to you what the ABC is. The 39.2 is sitting 
there and does not say a single word, does not stare, does not look funny, does not make any motions, 
does not do anything, and the person who just described the ABC turns to the 39.2 and says, "What is the 
matter with that?" The 39.2 inside is saying, "What me?" and starts stuttering some excuse. What is 
necessary is the direct assault on the obstacle: "Nothing. I was not paying any attention to you." They get 
this presumption all the time, this projection that they are ready to be provocative. 

In the white book: The energy to provoke through direct assault. These are people that have to deliver this 
direct assault. They have people coming right at them and say, "Why are you looking at me so strange?" 
"I am not looking at you at all." This answer is just as provocative in response. They give the direct 
assault back. 

Jupiter in detriment. The principle of preservation that tempts one to go around an obstacle that should be 
tackled headon. In the white book: An emotional discomfort when direct assault is essential. Think about 
what happens to these people. They are so used to being picked on because that is how they feel. They 
feel like they are being picked on. "Why do you pick on me? I did not say anything. I did not look at you 
funny. I did not do anything. Leave me alone." The people with the Jupiter in detriment get the direct 
assault and they do everything in their power to get away from that provocation. They do not go right 
back and say, "You idiot. Why do you look at me?" They try to say, "Really, no, no. Did I look like that? 
I did not mean to. I am really sorry that you thought that I thought that you are funny." These people get 
very angry. The other person will find that answer just as provocative as the direct assault. The 39 never 
gets outside of the game. 

39.3 Responsibility 

We come to the completion of the lower trigram, to the trial and error process, to the learning process. 
This is the resonance to the sixth line and the potential of wisdom. The third line is called Responsibility 
and here you begin to see the root of what will ultimately be, in the 39.6, the fuel for the 55.6, which will 
lead to the mutation. 

This is the trial and error process of learning to get to this point, and the first thing that we see in this is: 
The avoidance of confronting obstacles if failure puts others at risk. This 'others at risk' sounds strange 
because we are dealing with an individual fuel in an individual channel and circuit. Yet, built into it is a 
genetic recognition of the power of mutation to change everything, either positively or negatively. 

We have Jupiter in detriment. The great benefic whose first consideration is for the larger framework. In 
the white book: The energy to provoke through self-sacrifice. For example, you have a teacher who is 
bullying the children in the classroom, provoking them, and you have one child who carries this 39.3 
energy who will make the sacrifice in order to protect the others. They will go up to that teacher and 
challenge him. This child will get into trouble, will have to leave the school, will be punished. If this child 
will not make this self-sacrifice, others will be at risk. 

The responsibility in the third line is this early recognition of the responsibility of being a mutative force. 
That responsibility is not simply for the individual. Sometimes the provocation has to be for the benefit of 
others. These are the people in any kind of group situation that do the provoking for others. They, 
themselves, might well prefer not to get involved because trial and error means mistakes and punishment. 
But because nobody can, they do, because is built in. 

The Earth in detriment. The often disastrous assumption that others are more at risk if an obstacle is not 
confronted. The white book: The energy to provoke through the failure to make sacrifices. They do not 
make the sacrifice and provoke others through that behavior. In the same situation in the classroom, the 
capacity to provoke on behalf of everyone, but not doing it. This is extremely individual. 

The third line is starting the process of seeing that the individual mutation always has to be ready for 
sacrifice, always. The moment that you have a mutative force in the world, there are forces that want to 
destroy it. All individuals, as freaks, are subject to being stoned and, the moment that one is ready to 
make a mutative provocation for the benefit of others, it becomes the focus of that field of energy. 
Sacrifice is built into bringing mutation. There is no mutation without sacrifice. 

39.4 Temperance 

We come to the fourth line, to the beginning of the upper trigram. It is about being unidirectional; it is 
about being fixed and one -minded. This fourth line is one of the great lines of the 384 lines. It is such a 
complex line. Even the language of this line, its keynotes come from everywhere. 

The fourth line is called Temperance. It sounds very much like the introduction to the 12th hexagram. 
Careful evaluation and assessment before taking action. Before provoking. The nature of the gate is not 
about doing; it is about provoking. 

Moon exalted. The values of feelings and instincts in establishing the proper timing. Feelings have 
nothing to do with this stream. Instincts have nothing to do with this stream, either. Timing has nothing to 
do with this stream. We have already looked at the abstract, the tribal and the collective in that one 
sentence. Three keynotes from three different fields is a very complex energy. 

The values of feelings and instincts in establishing the proper timing. This means: when to provoke. 
Understand the beauty of this line. This line is the first time that we can go across the channel. It has the 
recognition that there is something else on the other side of the channel. The moment that it recognizes 
the forces on the other side, it says, "Oh. There is a big emotional motor over there and it is going up and 
down in a wave. If I don't choose the right time, I will never get the right spirit." 

In terms of the white book: The energy to provoke at exactly the right time. This is the magic and the 
fixation of the fourth line: when is the right time? Because of that, they externalize at different times until 
they learn. These are the kind of people that only provoke you on Mondays or when you tell them that 
you have a headache. They find out at what time to provoke you to get a maximum impact, to see whether 
or not you have the right spirit. 

The other side of this energy has the Sun in detriment. The faulty belief that willpower alone can 
overcome any obstacle regardless of circumstances. 'Willpower': this keynote belongs to the tribal 
circuitry. You see that this energy is very complex. You have all kinds of keynotes coming from the 
whole body graph. This whole field is the fuel for mutation. It is not the fuel to initiate mutation. It is not 
the 3/60. It is the fuel to bring that mutation out into the world and allow it to spread. It is very powerful 
in that sense. 

In the white book: The energy to provoke that ignores circumstances. This energy does not wait for the 
right time. These people end up being a pain in the neck because they are always provoking you at the 
wrong time. If it is the right time to provoke somebody when they have a headache, do not provoke them 
when they do not have one because you will get crushed. You keep on persisting to provoke them 
whenever you feel like it, instead of recognizing that there is a right time for that. 

39.5 Single-mindedness 

The fifth line is always being projected upon, so anybody that carries this fifth line is projected on as 
being provocative. Due to that projection, they do not have to provoke very much because people get out 
of their way, unless they are really looking for a fight. So, people avoid getting involved at any kind of 
difficult level with the 39.5 people. 

This line is called Single-mindedness. The rare ability not to overcome but to bypass obstacles. There is 
no one to be provoked out there, in that sense. They do not get a chance. What happens to these people is 
that they very rarely find the right spirit. This is a time that we are living in. The 39 provokes to find the 

spirit. That is its true nature. That is the first line. The fifth line is how everybody else sees it. How 
everybody else sees it as wrong. What they see is that provocation should not be necessary and it is 
something to be avoided. If provocation is avoided, no spirit can be found. These people are projected on 
that they are single-minded, that they are the ones that can get it done. They do not run into any problems 
because they do not get the constant provocation because other people are very aware of this capacity in 
them. 

Neptune exalted. The imagination to establish new patterns that make the obstacles irrelevant. The 
moment that the obstacles are irrelevant, the spirit is gone. Think about that. The moment that it is 
projected on you that you are provocative, so "let's not provoke them," there is no chance to find the 
spirit. But this is what the totality wants out of that fifth line. This is their projection on what this fuel is 
all about. 

The Mars in detriment. Simple hardheadedness. Though less exalted, it can often result in success and 
gather support by its very determination. It is amazing how many people are mutated by these 39.5's 
because, rather than going through the provocation with them, they just accept whatever it is in the mood, 
and they can often pull people along with them, but the spirit is missing. This is the whole thing. It is so 
important that when you are working with people that have the 39th gate, that they truly understand what 
provocation is for. It is there to find the right spirit. The right spirit is the spirit that is not provoked. You 
can cheat by doing the fifth line number. The fifth line number is, "Let's see. There does not seem to be 
any provocation out there, so everything is okay" It does not work that way. 

In our evolutionary process, we are slowly moving towards the sixth line. We are actually in the fifth line 
phase which is the great projected phase. So, we have the most complex Maya now that the planet has 
ever had. We have an enormous projected Maya around us. That is the density of the fifth line. 
Everything about our world is about projection now, our concepts about each other, the universe, and god. 
All of that is part of a vast projection field and all of that is through the fifth line, universalization, 
because we are all living this global village consciousness. It is part of the process to go through this fifth 
line phase so we can complete all of that because the spirit comes afterwards. It can't come now. It does 
not exist now. 

39.6 The Troubleshooter 

The Troubleshooter is an American Western term. They used to have these characters that could take you 
across the country in carriages. The person who was sitting beside the driver was called the 
troubleshooter. If any trouble came along, this person would shoot it. This is where the word 
'troubleshooter' comes from. 

Like all sixth lines, we have a transition field here. It goes beyond the nature of the hexagram and looks 
for much more. What the 39.6 is looking at is, "Can we get this mutation into the world and, once it is in 
the world, will it be of value to humanity?' That is its process. You can see what the beauty of 
provocation is, at its highest level. Provocation, at its highest level, is nothing more than the capacity to 
go to somebody else and provide them, empower them, with mutation. "I know what is wrong with your 
life." "Get out of my face," is the answer of a lot of people who do not like anybody coming up to them to 
tell them what their problem is. "Can I help you with this? Can I show you how to do this?" 

Nothing is more provocative in this life than somebody coming up to you and telling you what is wrong 
with you, and that they will fix it. Due to the nature of sixth lines, most of these troubleshooters never 
look for trouble and do not shoot. They just hope that the riot will be very quiet and everything will be 
okay. Their inherent gift is this capacity of penetrating to the core of what somebody's dilemma is. Not 

their own. Recognize how altruistic and special that is. Mutation is for the whole specie and never for the 
individuals. It is for the whole specie. Otherwise, it is of no value. 

So, the ultimate field here is as it says in the white book: The energy to provoke others by attempting to 
solve their problems. The 39 is provoking to find the right spirit. So, anybody who is going to listen to 
these very gifted people is the right spirit. To be able to offer this mutation is a very gifted fuel: those 
people take the mutation and move it along. 

In the black book it says: The natural gift for solving problems. It is a gift. What that ultimately means is 
that the final stage in our process, this mutation, will solve our problems. To get rid of these bodies is one 
way to solve our problems. It is just about changing the equipment. But nonetheless, you get to the point 
that you have problem-solving. What you will also have is when the 39 really has this capacity and when 
we get to the stage where the mutation takes place, it is a natural gift that will be accepted by others 
because they are a very important mutative force. 

Moon exalted. Practicality and the ability to guide and nurture others. These people get blown off so fast. 
In our work together, we are dealing with our adult consciousness, but you start your life with your 
design. If you have a 39.6 child and it says to you, "I don't think that you know what you are doing in the 
kitchen," or "You don't know how to run the computer," think about what happens to this 39.6 child. They 
have a natural gift for solving problems but it is provocative and they get rejected a lot for that 
provocation. That puts them in a bad mood because we are dealing with a mood gate and they feel terrible 
and then they say, "I don't care. I won't help them or tell them what is wrong. They will give me a hard 
time. They will not do that." Always remember that when you are looking at any line, think about it first 
as a child's line before you think about it as an adult line. You get to see that so much of what is there in 
the beginning is already deeply conditioned by the forces around it and so few of these aspects get a 
chance to flourish because of that. 

All 39 children know what that is like. That provocation always was in them. They already provoked you 
as a baby. Some of these babies get thrown against walls. Recognize that you start your life with your 
design and see it in that perspective, and then you begin to understand what it may or may not be like. In 
most cases, 39.6's do not provoke anything. It is rare. It has to do with the spirit that is available. If there 
is the right spirit, there is the opportunity for them to always release their wisdom. All sixth lines carry the 
potential of wisdom. They can release the wisdom of what the problem is and how to solve that problem. 
Remember that it is a genetic gift. There is no awareness here. It is simply the capacity in that fuel to deal 
with any dilemma and to be able to mutate it. 

On the other side: The emotional drive to dominate that provokes others. In the black book we have Mars 
in detriment. Ego dominance that generally abuses this gift for self-aggrandizement and personal ambition 
rather than for the benefit of others. It is so difficult for these people when they are growing up because 
they can't solve problems if they go the other way. They insist for the rest of their lives that they are the 
only ones in the world that can solve any problem and that others had better pay attention to them or 
nothing is going to happen. Both of those stances are not provoking at all when it is obvious that it is 
there because we take in each other's auras. Or provoking insistently and again, remember that most of the 
time, the potential of the sixth line does not come out because it has already been held back in the youth. 
There will be exceptions. 

When we have the transition that is going to take place, when this movement takes place and this begins 
to open up, these people will really be of value in society. It will be a time for them when they will 
flourish because their gifts are essential to maintain the spirit field. The individual stream maintains it. 

Remember that the 39 is coming out of the root center. The Troubleshooters are under enormous pressure 
to solve problems. They have no other way. That is their nature and they have to recognize when not to 
provoke. "If I can't solve your problems, I will stop eating." We have people who do that all the time. 
That is the ultimate 39.6 provocation. "You do not treat us well in our independence movement, so will 
we all stop eating." Or the other way around: people who can't solve the problem and get fat. 

HEXAGRAM 40 DELIVERANCE 

The heart center and the Self are of enormous significance to us. The G center and the heart center are 
part of the most basic and primary infrastructure that is built within us. They both represent qualities that 
are often deeply confused: the relationship between the Self and the T. In looking at the ego gates and the 
gates of the G, we are going to distinguish very clearly between the natures of these two. 

In dealing with the ego, a picture of the tribal circuitry gives an impression of the importance of the heart 
center and the ego in our mundane lives. It is absolutely essential for humanity to function out of its ego. 
This is why we have civilizations and cultures (friendship is one of the best examples of this) that are 
always caught up in the ego, in how great they are, or have been. 

Ego is intrinsic to the nature of what the tribe is all about. Everything about tribal circuitry is rooted in the 
ego. More than that, the 51, which is missing in this picture of tribal circuitry, is also tribal even though it 
is deeply individual. As part of individual circuitry, it serves the tribe. It is directly connected to the tribe. 
The way in which we are going to look at the heart center is through its two primary functions, which are 
willpower in the 40th gate leading to the 51st gate, and ego or the possessiveness of the T in the 26th gate 
leading to the 21st gate. 

The heart center is very complex. It is obviously misunderstood. Egoism is something that is put down in 
the Eastern side of our world, this quality of the T and its possessiveness. When you are looking at the 
ego, you are looking at a biological complexity that is unlike any other center that we have. We will look 
at these very important functions. Willpower begins with the stomach which is part of the heart center, 
like the heart muscle itself which is in the 21 st gate, or the gall bladder which is in the 51 st gate, or the 
thymus gland which generates our immune system which is in the 26th gate. We have a very complex 
center here, in terms of how it moves its information out into the biological structure. 

The stomach and the heart give you a deep insight into the nature of how the ego works. The ego, the will, 
can never work consistently. It is very important to grasp this. Willpower can only last so long under 
certain circumstances and then it has to give up, in the same way that your heart needs to beat. It cannot 
hold the tone. There has to be the space in between. There has to be this moment of tension and then 
relaxation. The same thing is true for the nature of the stomach. You cannot feed the stomach all day. It is 
not possible. The stomach needs to have its time of rest and then it needs to have its time of work. In 
understanding the nature of the ego, it is important to see that it is always looking for rest. This is 
something about the ego that is not really understood. It is not looking to go out and to shine, to send out 
its willpower. It is basically looking to rest until there is exactly the right timing to release that energy, so 
that the release of that energy is productive because the ego itself knows that it can only be active so long. 
In other words, unless you really have the will, you are not able to climb that mountain. 

The ego recognizes that it must have the resource and, at the same time, in order to get there, it knows that 
it has to rest. This makes the will something that is not always easy for others because it is unlike any of 
the other motors. When you turn on the generator, you turn it on for life until death, frequency after 
frequency, on and on and on. When you turn on the emotional system, you have a lifelong wave. When 
you turn of the adrenaline system, the pressure never goes away. It is constant. The thing about the ego is 
that it works and then it goes on vacation. That is the nature of the ego. 

The ego mechanic, here, in the white book: A will or lack of will to provide for the needy. This is the role 
of the 40th gate. In English, Deliverance has several meanings: Jesus delivered people from their sins. To 
be delivered is almost equivalent to being brought to satori, or enlightenment. To be delivered from evil is 
in the Lord's Prayer. Deliverance carries with it quite a substantial value as a mundane process: to be the 

one that delivers is synonymous with being a breadwinner. If you deliver, you bring home the goods so 
that everybody can eat. Deliverance also has a high mystical and spiritual value to it. 

The very name of this gate is what is really demanded of the ego. The tribe needs the ego to express its 
power. Willpower is something that does not operate in a fixed pattern. All of us know that by the way we 
eat. You can be fairly regular in your eating but you can also have all kinds of variations that run in 
between. Only when the ego system builds up its proper readiness is it going to use that willpower. When 
the willpower is there, its purpose is to provide for those who need. The byproduct of that is that the 
deliverer may in fact do well themselves, but the thing that drives their ego is the need of those who call 
upon it. This is classic in the nature of the 40/37, in the channel of Community, in terms of the marriage 
contract. This is the channel of the marriage contract in sexuality. The reality is that the 40 is expected to 
deliver. The 40 and its ego is expected to go out there in the world and conquer the material plane and, in 
return, it will have its ego massaged. 

The whole thing to understand about the 40th gate is that it is not the big powerful will. We find the 
strong will in the 51st gate. Rather, the 40 is the potential of will that can be built up or inflated by others. 
The ego is simply lazy and basically wants to rest, "Yes, I can do it but, please, I need my rest first before 
I will try that." Before the ego gets going, it has to have something on the other side that says, "You are 
really wonderful," or "There is nothing in the refrigerator and you have to go out and do something about 
it." The fact is that the ego needs to be worked on. If it does not get worked on, if it does not get massaged 
or pumped up, it says, "Sorry, I am tired today and I don't feel like doing it. I will just sit here." 

Above the lines, the key to everything about the 40th gate, it says: The point of transition between 
struggle and liberation. This is the whole business of understanding the ego. It has its time for struggle 
and then it has its required liberation, to be free of the struggle. No ego can stay with struggle. This is 
something so important to understand. You can only push will so far. 

40.1 Recuperation 

When we get to the beginning of any hexagram structure, we begin with the first line in the lower trigram. 
Remember that the lower trigram does not know that there is anything else at the other end of the channel. 
So, they are not social and are quite surprised, even though it happens to be a social channel, the channel 
of the social marriage contract, in that sense. The first three lines are not socially gifted. First lines are 
only interested in the foundation. They themselves tend to be invisible. In other words, they are the kind 
of ego you can't find to tell them that the refrigerator is empty. They are out in the backyard somewhere 
having a snooze. They don't want to have anything to do with that. While they are lying there, they are 
trying to figure out if willpower is something of value in the first place. 

The first line, which always represents the essence of any hexagram, is called Recuperation. It tells you 
what the ego requires. It can only be used for so long and then it must have its rest. If you look at any 
kind of long-term relationship of couples where the man comes home from work and just throws himself 
on the sofa and turns on the TV and blares out his brain, and there is this whole list of things that he could 
be doing. You can't ask him. If you do that, it will create problems because that willpower is also ego. 
"Don't bother me now." The ego must have its rest. When you give it its rest, everything works. 

The ability to relax and enjoy the fruits of one's labors. Whenever I see somebody with this line, I always 
remind them of one thing: Your friends are only of value to you as long as they don't take you aside and 
say, "Excuse me, you really have a problem." For this kind of person, friendship is not having people tell 
them that they have a problem that their willpower has to deal with, that they have to go out and do 
something about. They just want to be able to relax. They will do their work if you let them relax. They 
need to relax. 

This is true for the stomach. It is very important for any human being to understand the nature of 
nutrition. You cannot eat if you are not hungry anymore than willpower can be used if it is not the right 
time and the person who has that capacity does not want to be involved in that process. This is 
devastating for the system. It is extremely unhealthy and creates what people call ulcers. It creates all 
kinds of difficulties within the physical stomach itself. 

The Moon is in detriment. The Moon cannot stand still. The whole thing about this is that this 40th gate, 
though it requires its rest, it cannot just rest. If it can rest when it comes home from work, it has to get up 
the next day and go out into the world and do its thing. In the social context, these are people who do not 
stay with the same relationships in their lifetime. Their communities and families go through changes 
because what they are looking for is to be left in peace. 

In the white book: The ego strength to enjoy being alone. The 40th gate says, "I don't need you." This is 
not true. The 40th gate and the 26th gate are gates of denial. It is in their mechanism to say, "Don't bother 
me now." In order to get the ego to do anything, you have to massage it. That is why this "don't bother 
me" is not true. Otherwise, it will say, "I will stay alone," and the other says, "Oh, no you can't. We really 
need you. We have to have you. You are so important to us." They have to be pulled into the game. 

The other side is: The ego uncomfortable with being alone too long. After the 40th gate had its rest, it 
says, "Why isn't there anybody around being nice to me and asking me to go to work? And who needs 
me? Why doesn't somebody need met" So, they are ready to look for somebody who will need them, so 
that their ego can be puffed up and they can go out and come back and say, "Hey, don't bother me now. 
I'm getting my rest." 

40.2 Resoluteness 

When you are dealing with the second line, you are dealing with a light on inside the house and people 
can see in. Wherever you have the second line, you have to learn in life that other people see things in you 
that you don't see yourself. The 40th hexagram is about aloneness in the ego sense, as we have seen. The 
ego requires its time for rest. It seeks to be alone so that it is not pulled on as an ego force. The second 
line does not know very much about being social and other people. Other people are walking by its house, 
looking through its window and they say, "This one is alone, but this one can have a very strong will. If 
we can get to this one, it is able to do something for us." All of a sudden, the 40 is surprised that there is 
somebody there that is pulling on their willpower. 

Resoluteness. The power and authoriy in deliverance... (aloneness) ... to shed forever the qualities which 
hampered liberation. In other words, for the second line, aloneness is something that is very healthy. It is 
good for them. After all, they don't know how to deal with the outside anyway, so they are stuck on the 
inside. 

When you come to the detriment, you have: A natural peacefulness that in deliverance may sympathize 
with and attempt to nurture the forces which hampered liberation. By the way, liberation is just a word for 
rest. It is better to be alone than having people around who constantly pull you into work. That is what 
this line is saying at its exalted side, but at its detriment side it is saying that one is defenseless in that 
moment that people look inside, see that you have the will and come and get it. 

One of the jokes about me is that my second line is a projection. I project out that I am alone, but it is 
actually not that difficult to come up to me and ask me something, to come into my aura. There are people 
who know how to get in and take that. 

The power through aloneness to recognize the importance and the potential disruptive effect of others. 
"What they are going to get me into now?" This is what you learn. All second lines collapse under 
recognition because this is what a second line is about. This is how they learn. All of a sudden, somebody 
sees something in you that you don't know is there. People are seeing in me that there is some chance to 
make a bargain, and I don't even know that is there. They can see that. 

The other side is: The power of loneliness to blind the ego to the possible disruptive effect of others. 
When somebody gets in, because the second line doesn't know what to do with others, it is basically 
stuck, and it ends up getting pulled into things. The basic demand of the ego: "Would you do me a favor?" 
Anyone who is coming to the ego is coming for its will and its capacity to do things. The aloneness in this 
gate is all about saying, "I'll be with you sometimes. But the rest of the time, leave me alone." Most of the 
people think that is very personal. In other words, they take it as a psychological statement rather than 
what it is. It is a pure ego statement. Willpower can only work so much. What happens to the second line 
is that it really gets disrupted because they don't really know what is going on inside of them. They are 
just busy in their aloneness. 

40.3 Humility 

Before you get to the Pluto exalted in this line, you have an overview statement that says: A calculated 
mode in deliverance to avoid attracting the attention of negative forces. Whenever you see an introduction 
in a line before the exalted and the detriment, that is telling you that you are dealing with a lifelong 
process, an ongoing process, and really is not something that is dealt with properly until one matures in 
life. All third lines are lines of adaptation, and as such are lines of trial and error. 

It will be, in this line of Humility, a trial and error process to find out about aloneness, and to find out in 
your aloneness how not to attract negative forces. It does not mean that you don't attract them. It actually 
means that you will attract negative forces until you finally learn: better to be alone than to have this one 
or that one in your life. Remember that this is fundamentally social and communal, so it really is about 
the other in that sense. 

Pluto exalted. The subtlety to enjoy deliverance... (being alone) ...without having to Haunt it. This is like 
not telling everybody, "You have to work and I can rest. I have done mine." It is not about that. It is about 
enjoying your quiet time, your time between having to use the willpower. 

Mars in detriment. The ego arrogance that demands attention and gets it. In the white book, it gives you a 
clear picture. It says: The capacity of the ego to avoid negative forces even if it means being alone. This is 
what the ego has to learn in the third line. It is better to be alone than to deal with negative forces. 

In the detriment: The capacity of the ego to demand attention. And it gets it, which means that, literally, 
that ego ends up doing all kinds of things that it shouldn't, with the wrong influences in his life. It is so 
important to understand that the power of the will is dependant on the massage. If you have a 40 football 
team and you put them on the field where they are at home, and you have 40,000 people shouting their 
name, pumping them up, they will play better than if there are only ten people and they are all booing. In 
other words, the power of the will is always dependant on who is pulling on that will. 

The 'negative forces' are those forces that do not allow that will to operate properly, or for that rest to be 
allowed in between. It is a trial and error process. It will take time in the life to develop that. They are 
better off alone than having to deal with negative forces. They are not better off alone in general. No ego 
can be alone forever. It must go out and do its business, but it is better to be alone than to be with negative 
forces. You have forces (other people) that say, "I need you to do this. You have to work." If that ego 
does not have the power to do that, does not feel like doing that, does not have strength to do that, it is 

dealing with negative forces because they are pulling on it to do something that is not natural for them. 
Then it is better to be alone. Aloneness has to do with the stomach. You can only be alone so long before 
you go hungry. You have to feed yourself. You have to look after yourself. That is what the willpower is 
for. In the third line, it is a learning process. 

40.4 Organization 

With the fourth line, we come to the upper trigram, to a transpersonal process which is taking place in a 
social channel here. The fourth to sixth lines have specific social skills. Fourth lines are fixed and one- 
pointed. They are unidirectional, one-tracked. 

The fourth line here is: The power to transform and the intuitive intellect to select and organize for the 
purpose of maintaining deliverance. All this means is: when you know that there is another side, how 
much work do you have to give them to keep them happy and quiet so that they continue to massage your 
ego and you'll have your chance for rest? In other words, the more you have your life together on the 
material plane, your job, your work, it is all very healthy. This is being organized. Being able to do your 
work and then having the time to be able to relax. 

The Mars in detriment is different though. An uncontrollable zeal that ignores the quality of support in 
preference for the quantity, which in the long run may destabilize deliverance. These are people that drop 
dead from work. These are workaholics. We are dealing with a fourth line, so you are dealing with this 
fixed externalization. They are really onetracked. "I will get my will out, and then I have to rest." When 
you get to the detriment, it is all about, "Oh, this one wants me. Okay, I will do this work. This one wants 
me; I will get my will out." As long as they keep on getting their ego massaged, it can be very dangerous. 

The fourth line in the white book: The power of the ego when organized and active to maintain 
separateness. Organize actively, do your ego work, and pull away and have your rest. In the same way as 
human beings do when they eat, they should have a chance to rest afterwards. It is healthy for them. In 
Spain, they have these big 'siestas.' You eat, and then everything is closed and there is nothing to do for 
hours, and it is correct. This is great for the stomach. 

On the other side: The empowering of the ego through the capacity to organize others. The more they get 
into that organization, the less time they have left. They are so busy dealing with using their will that they 
don't take their rest. And again, this is something that is essential. We cannot overwork the ego. The more 
you overwork it, the less productive it becomes. 

40.5 Rigidity 

All first lines tell you about the intrinsic nature of a hexagram, and fifth lines tell you how everybody sees 
them. The ego is never seen by society as being something that is pleasant. The ego puts food in 
civilization's mouth and yet, at the same time, the ego says, "Keep a low profile. Don't show it too much 
because it is not a nice thing." 

The fifth line here is called Rigidity. The projection onto this ego is that it is rigid. The overview line here 
shows that it is a lifelong process. The recognition that to achieve liberation... (to achieve your rest) ...all 
negative forces must be rejected. The demands on the ego always have to be censored. The ego is 
standing there saying, "What do you actually want from me? Tell me exactly. Then I know whether you 
are a positive or a negative force, so I know whether my will suits that. " 

Uranus exalted. The revolutionary who demands absolute victory. Absolute victory in this sense is, "I do 
my thing when I want. And when I rest, leave me alone." Fifth lines in the 40 have great advantages in 

life because people project on them that that is exactly what they are going to be like. They will be rigid. 
This is what others project on them, "This is a rigid ego. It will do its thing when it wants, and otherwise, 
it will do nothing." That is how society sees it. 

By the way, it does not mean that that is true. You can see what happens in the detriment. Remember that 
the fifth line is in harmony to the second. In the second line, in the detriment, we saw the natural 
peacefulness that will let in the wrong force and have that wrong force pull it out of its aloneness. Here, 
the fifth line in the detriment is: A tendency in revolution to accept a certain amount of necessary 
deviation on the assumption that it can be successfully purged later. 

'Let them keep on making that kind of demand on me because it is nice that they are here giving me this 
massage. But afterwards, I will teach them not to do that." It is typical of the 40's rigidity. The power of 
the ego is maintained in the rejection of negative relationships. Remember, what is negative to the ego is 
simply anything that calls on it when it does not want to work. The ego is not an awareness. It is just a 
motor. You can have a 40 sitting at the telephone and they get 5 calls from people. Four of them ask them 
to do things, and they just don't like the people and do not identify with the thing. Then the fifth call 
comes and they say, "I am ready," and off they go. They are ready to do it. It all depends on who is 
calling. This is what moves the world. 

The weakness of the ego in its loneliness to maintain and not reject negative relationships. The ego is 
always vulnerable to its aloneness because it survives on the massage. Even though it needs to push the 
other away, it does not want to push them away too far. They want to make sure that they will be close 
enough later so that they can massage them again, so that they are ready to go back and do their thing. 
This is the nature of the ego. People do not particularly like it. 

40.6 Decapitation 

Sixth lines are never part of the hexagram. They are sifting on the roof and because of that, they have a 
totally different perspective. The 40.6 perspective is more than just the gate at the other end of the 
channel. It goes out to the entire circuit. It is looking at all of the possibilities that are there in the tribal 
circuitry. And more than that, the sixth line is moving in a track. The next thing that it is going to meet is 
the 64.1. It is on its way to many different things. When it is sifting up there on the roof, you cannot 
expect it to respond in the way the rest of the lines do. 

This sixth line is called Decapitation. It is an overview line; it is a lifelong process. Remember something 
about all sixth lines. Whatever the description of a sixth line is, you live it out quickly when you are 
young and then you avoid it almost entirely for the rest of your life. If you have the 59.6, you have a lot of 
one night stands until the age of 18 to 25, and then you never do it again. The fact of the matter is that 
what happens with sixth lines is that you live them out, but the moment you realize that you are not 
getting what you want out of that, it stops. The sixth line is a cosmic fence sitter. 

In this image of the community or the family, think about what this line says. It says: The necessary 
destruction of inferior forces in positions of power before liberation can take place. This is about, who are 
these people to make demands on the ego? You can imagine the 40.6 sitting on the roof of their house and 
looking into the garden and seeing their family there. They know which ones should be taken from power 
because they know exactly which ones put pressure on the will system that is not correct. They are 
inferior. They do not belong there. The will is an incredible thing if it is properly treated, but if not, it is a 
very destructive thing. 

The Sun exalted. The authority, coupled with the magnanimity to remove from power only those who 
deserve such drastic treatment. All of the language here in this hexagram was about 'negative forces'. The 

sixth line talks about 'inferior forces'. The demands that the negative forces make on the will are 
legitimate; they are just not particularly good for that will and so are only negative in that sense. But the 
inferior forces make demands that are unfair, unnecessary, and unreasonable. They are the ones that have 
to be removed from power and that is the gift of the sixth line in the 40. 

The Earth in detriment. Exemplified by the terror of the French revolution, where the idea of who was 
deserving of punishment was cruelly extended to an entire class. We are dealing with the tribe here. "How 
dare the state tax me until I am dead? I will kill those bastards because they are inferior and destroying 
my society, my family, my life. They are taxing my willpower to the point that I cannot function 
anymore." That is not about negative forces anymore. That is about inferior forces because they make 
claims and bargains with the will that are unfair. "You go out and do that for me, darling, and I will give 
you a reward." Then you go home and there is no reward. It is not fair, and the sixth line learns that very 
early. It climbs up to the top of the house and says, "They have no right to tell me to do that." 

The power and authority of the ego to reject individuals in legitimate defense of the group. If the ego is 
treated properly, everybody benefits. The other side is: The distortion of the ego through power and 
authority. What is important for the 40.6 is that if you have a child with this line, you cannot create false 
bargains with them. You cannot make these deals that are famous in tribes. "You take out the garbage and 
I do that." You'd better keep your word. Otherwise, you become an inferior force and they will cut off 
your head. 

HEXAGRAM 41 DECREASE 

The pressure centers are of enormous importance, like all things. We are basically a sandwich. You have 
a pressure above and a pressure below, and everything else is just squashed in the middle. Those 
pressures rule the nature of the world that we live in. They fuel all of the basic potentials of what it is to 
be in a body, of what it is to live out the consciousness of being a human being. They are essential and 
they are always present. 

When I say they are always present, that is not a matter of whether you have them personally in your 
design or not. As long as they are in the world, they are a part of the aura of the world and everybody gets 
in contact with them. So, in looking at these pressure centers, please understand that we are looking at the 
fundamental root of all human processes. In that, the fundamental source of pressure is necessary to 
initiate all of these processes. 

I start with the 41st hexagram for a particular reason. We are living in a time in which the 41st hexagram 
is activated by outer planets so we are going to have a deep continuing experience with it. The 41 st 
hexagram is the fuel or the pressure of an abstract stream in the sensing circuit, the stream of feeling. This 
stream is a uniquely human stream. It is the evolutionary and genetic material necessary for us to 
experience incarnation in a human form. Without this stream, the human evolutionary process would not 
exist. Not only are we speaking here of a fundamental pressure for a life process, but in particular, to 
understand it is not shared with any other form of life. This is a very specific pressure and a very specific 
stream that is directly associated with what we experience as being human. 

The 41st hexagram, as a codon in our genetic code, is the only initiating codon. It is an initiating codon in 
the sense that it begins. It is at the beginning in the genetic structure of everything. Thus, we begin with 
the 41 st hexagram, with the most important pressure in our evolutionary process now and ever since we 
became Homo sapiens, or modern humans. The 41st hexagram is the trigger that brought us into the stage 
that we are in and we are still going towards completion. 

What is unique for us as human beings is the capacity to be able to feel. This capacity leads to the need, 
the desire for experience. The desire for experience to be able to feel and manifest that feeling is the 
human evolutionary process. It is what drives us from one experience to the next until we develop through 
that process. It also brings into play the nature of crisis. In other words, it tells us very clearly that the 
evolutionary process is rooted in crisis, change and transitoriness. The 41st gate, Decrease, is the gate of 
contraction and it is the fuel in which there is the energy to feel, or not. So, the whole capacity to feel, the 
complete potential that exists in our genetic spectrum, is rooted in the 41. 

In looking at sexuality in Human Design, the 41 is the gate of fantasy, the capacity to be able to fantasize 
the feeling itself because all the feelings lie there. The old Chinese image of the 41st hexagram was the 
gardener who would cut back the garden in the wintertime or fall to prepare it for the following season. 
By cutting it back, nothing was lost because all the potential of that plant, everything that that plant could 
possibly be, every twig, every leaf and every flower, was already there within it, contracted inside, held 
inside as a potential. So the 41st gate carries with it this enormous potential for any kind of experience. 

This is the key to what it is to be human. Its mechanic is that it is always about hunger. A human being is 
so different from its animal kin. They only have one kind of hunger: basic, predatory hunger to stay alive. 
But human beings have a duality in that. We have the material hunger, the hunger for survival, but we 
also have this other hunger, the deeper one: the human hunger for experience. To go to Mars and see what 
the rocks look like. What for? Just to see what the rocks are. To discover America. What for? Just to see 
what is there on the other side. The basic fuel, the fundamental fuel for the evolutionary process, is the 
hunger to feel. 

The whole key to being an abstract being, whatever kind of abstract definition you have, is that the 
essential understanding about life is rooted in something very simple: one step after the other. Don't 
repeat your steps. Look at what that really is saying, like the 64th gate in the ajna: because there is so 
much potential information, built into these gates is a mechanism that is ready to release only one at a 
time. In other words, all those feelings are built up within the nature of the 41 as a resource. 

Above the lines in the black book it says, The limitation of resources which maximizes development of 
potential. If you have all these fantasies running around inside of you, it will diminish your potential. If 
you focus your energy (the name of this channel) on one fantasy, on one feeling, then you can move 
through that. And when it is over, you can go on to the next one. 

This is the key to the abstract process, this maximization of that potential by recognizing that this resource 
is always there. You don't have to have all the fantasies all the time, you can have one at a time and go 
through what is the correct evolutionary process. 

41.1 Reasonableness 

Remember, when you are looking at a hexagram, the first line is always going to represent not simply the 
foundation of the hexagram, but its essential truth. What is its basis? 

The first line is Reasonableness. You can't have all of your fantasies because you will lose your power. 
You must get one and then go on to the next. Reasonableness becomes the key. The appropriate 
delegation of responsibility. The first line is looking inward. It has no capacity to look outward. It is 
interested in what the essential mechanism is. What is fantasy? That is the question that the first line 
always asks. 

When the first line of the 41 is a child, they want to know what the difference is between what is real and 
what is fantasy. They want to grasp that right away. What is fantasy? The appropriate delegation of 
responsibility; it is the theme we have just been looking at. 

Remember that we are dealing with the root center, with the adrenaline hormone, the stress hormone. The 
root center carries with it enormous power. There is a tremendous fuel at work here. So, the appropriate 
delegation of responsibility is how to use that energy. In other words, what fantasy, what feeling do you 
focus on? Don't get caught up in just seeing that fantasy. If you are somebody who is focusing on feeling 
good about the day and feeling bad about your work and you are a Al. 1, you will be very uncomfortable. 
Either focus on the good feeling (that it is a nice day) or focus on feeling bad (because you are at work), 
but do not try to focus on both of them. It will not work for you. It will not be productive for you. It will 
not be a healthy fueling of your potential. 

Remember the mirrors, the dualistic interplay in Design. The splenic system is our immune system. It is 
our protection from disease. We know that it is all about health. But recognize as well that there is illness 
that strikes the solar plex system, this powerful motor emotional system: emotional illness, emotional 
unhealthiness, lack of balance, emotionally. When these fuels are properly recognized and you live out 
their nature, then the solar plex, the emotional system, benefits from that and it becomes healthier. It is 
getting a healthier fuel. These are pressures, and they carry with them a great deal of force. I would have 
used the word 'conditioning' but I do not want to confuse you. This power carries a great deal of force. 

This line has Neptune exalted. The imagination to make the very best out of very little. You don't need to 
have all the feelings to get everything out of it. One focused feeling can take you all the way: always will, 
always can. That Neptunian side tends to be people who are much more caught up in the fantasy of the 

41, the Neptunian quality of that. Anybody who has Neptune there has it veiled automatically. Think 
about that: the foundation is automatically veiled, so it can be very mysterious and it tends to be about 
fantasy on the non-manifesting side. 

The Mercurial side: A tendency in understanding to assume capability, leading to strain. I always tell 
people with the 41 st gate: it is wonderful for you to have this feeling, this fantasy inside, but don't ever 
think that there is more for you. Remember that everything about the abstract stream is about our process 
of expectations. If you do one step after the other, you assume that you will get somewhere because that is 
the nature of the abstract process. The assumption of capability is when you look inside and you see you 
have this fantasy, you think that because you can fantasize it, you can do it. I can fantasize making love to 
Martians but I will not be able to do it. The reality is that for these people, this is often very difficult. You 
can see it in the white book. It talks about coolness and the hothead: the cool and hot of the pressure to 
feel. This is the fundamental duality in fantasy: they are either cool or hot fantasies. 

Coolness, where the energy to release feelings is selective. In other words, one is clear about one feeling 
at a time. By the way, these feelings can come very quickly but as long as they are one at a time, it is 
okay. The hothead, the urge to release feelings. What happens to these people is that they can get into a 
great deal of trouble in life because they have within them this need to feel out what is essentially nothing 
more than a fantasy, with very little odds of realizing it. 

Remember that only the fourth to the sixth lines really have the skills to integrate with the energy on the 
other side. The first line is simply there to look into the nature of the feeling, of the fantasy, but the 
moment it is trying to live that out, it will get a lot of crises. If they are truly emotional people, they will 
enjoy their crises anyway. The 41st gate is a potential to release your own feelings and it is also a 
potential to condition the release of feelings in others. 

The 41st hexagram is a nice meditation. You have to see that we have six steps in our evolutionary 
process, and we are not at the sixth line yet. Wie will all have very interesting experiences as a collective 
(not necessarily individually) with the movement of Neptune and Uranus reaching 41.6. It is an 
evolutionary process. We have gone as far as the fifth line. So, when you are looking at this process, the 
first thing to recognize about the very first step is that human evolution was rooted in focus on the feeling, 
and then you get the experience. That is how you learn. If you are sitting there and you have a zillion 
feelings, you do not move. There is no way to go. The very first thing that distinguished us was the 
capacity to have a feeling, the fantasy to focus on that and to hold that focus until the potential, the 30th 
gate at the other end, to begin a process of actually manifesting that as experience was there. 

41.2 Caution 

When you come to the second line, you are no longer in the foundation. Now you have this deep genetic 
need to project the quality of the gate outwards: "Here I am with the fuel to feel." In projecting it 
outwards, you have the word Caution. Humanism tempered by pragmatism. The evolutionary process 
begins in the individual, in the single being. The next step is that it has to become something broader than 
that: collective. 

The two sides of this are Saturn and Mars. A conservative nature that does not risk its own security in 
aiding others. You can fantasize how you can help somebody and you can then go and focus on that and 
do it. You can fantasize on helping somebody and not be able to manifest that at all. You can have a 
feeling for starving children in Biafra and not send any coins. These things are all built into the Saturnian 
line. 

In the white book: Energy for one's own feelings but not for others. To focus on one's own feelings, one's 
own fantasies, and not on the feelings of others or whatever their requirements happen to be. 

The Martian side is The energy for the display of feelings for recognition. This is trying to get others to 
recognize that one is a feeling person. Remember that the second line is projecting outward. 

A desire for recognition that throws caution to the winds, depleting valuable resources for only temporary 
gain. This stream is about desire for change, for experience and about the desire to fulfill one's fantasies. 
It is the expectation that if one has a fantasy and fulfills it, one is going to get something. The second line 
is projecting outwards that they have this resource inside of them. 

Remember the immaturity of Mars. Immaturity is not a question of good or bad. The immature 41.2, 
projecting out that they have the feeling that somebody hooks into, may discover that they are terribly 
equipped for that and it can end up being a crisis because they can be a paper tiger. The fact is that they 
are projecting something out and do not have the quality of the first line. They do not have this 
foundation. On the Martian side, they put all the energy into projecting it out. They want people to 
connect to their feeling. They want to be able to get their fantasy to the next step. This can present all 
kinds of difficulties for them. 

There is something else about this: already in this second line, which is very rare, there is a need for 
others. This is the most sexual of all the streams and there is no way that the human experience was going 
to be allowed to be individual. It wasn't. They are collective and, as such, early (in the second line, a line 
that is titled Humanism) there is a need to display this feeling for others to fulfill the feeling, the fantasy, 
the collective process of not having the experience by yourself, but sharing the experience with somebody 
else. The second line is not equipped. It is Mars; it is immature and it has its problems with that. The 
exalted line, the Saturnian field, is more secure in that role. 

41.3 Efficiency 

One of the dilemmas of the collective process is that somebody always starts it. So, in that essence, there 
is always an individual, a single being, that starts to change events. When you are looking at the whole 
evolutionary process here, you will see in the dualities of the lines that the exalted tend to point towards 
doing things by oneself, whereas the detriment says, "No, we have to involve everybody else." The third 
line is classic of this. Remember that the third line is completing a process. It has qualities of the first and 
second line. It has completed the process in the sense that it is, within itself, ready to experiment. 

The third line is about trial and error, bonds made and broken. It is about this learning process which is 
called Efficiency here. In times of decrease selfishness is justified. In that moment of your feeling, what it 
is saying is: release your energy into that feeling and you will discover whether that is a mistake or not. 
Wait and see. But release all of your energy into that feeling. That is efficient. 

Remember that the adrenaline system, if it is defined in somebody, must be used. This energy must be 
worked. It is absolutely essential. When that energy is being used properly, that is what efficiency is all 
about. Because it is a. third line, it means that you are not instantly efficient. It means that you have to 
learn how to be efficient, when to release energy into a fantasy, when to release energy into a feeling. 
This is not about an awareness that tells you when. It is about a process that, if you don't do it right, it 
does not work and you learn from that experience and you try to do it differently the next time, as a result 
of that learning experience. 

Saturn exalted. Material ambition and the discipline to go at it alone; and The energy that fuels the feeling 
for personal ambition. Very much oriented towards someone's rather than the collective's experience. "I 

will see how that mushroom tastes. That is my fantasy. I want to feel what that is like. I want to have that 
experience." If the person drops dead after eating the mushroom, nobody else will do it. But if that person 
has a wonderful trip and sees God and they tell their collective friends, "Hey, I just saw God. All you 
have to do is to eat one of these," then it can become a collective experience, a collective feeling. What 
this line is saying is that efficiency is to put your energy into your feeling and your fantasy. 

When you come to the other side, you have the Moon in detriment. I have my design Moon in this line. I 
know it well. 

Instinctive assistance, admirable but in this position misguided, where two will use up resources more 
than twice as fast as one. The energy that fuels the feeling to share. I am very individual. This is the only 
part of me that really is designed to give anything to anybody at any time. One of the jokes in my life is 
that my son has Saturn in the 41.3. He is always in my pocket. He is the selfish one and I have to share. 
This feeling that one has to share: now, it is a detriment. Think of the jokes. 

This whole stream is about the human experience and though each of these early lines are geared towards 
making sure that the evolutionary process goes on, somebody has to take the first step to go across the 
mountain. There is going to be this force underneath that says, "Yes, but I have to take somebody with me 
in order to share the experience with me because otherwise, we do not have a humanity. "V just have a 
kind of a bizarre species but we don't have what will become a strictly human phenomenon, something 
that we call culture. No culture, no civilization until we share our experiences. By the way, I have an 
undefined root center and my 41.3 is unconscious, so I do not trust that process. It 
is always conditioned by others. 

41.4 Correction 

When we get to the upper trigram, we get to a different kind of process because the fourth and fifth lines 
are oriented towards the other end of the channel. They recognize the potential at the other side through 
definition. By their very nature, the fourth and fifth lines are the social lines because it is inherent in their 
genetic capacity to integrate and to look across the channel for the definition. 

Here, we are dealing with a very collective stream, with an experiential stream, a sexual stream. That 
means we are dealing with very powerful forces. The moment you come to the fourth line, you come to 
the fixedness of a fourth line. Fourth lines are unidirectional. They are fixed. The first thing we can 
recognize about that is that, given the nature of this gate, this is a very appropriate line. Decrease is 
designed to operate with one feeling at a time, with one fantasy you are focused on at a time. So, this 
unidirectional capacity in the fourth line is of value. You are focused and fixed on your feeling. You are 
holding back all of this fuel, waiting for the moment that the potential is there because you can recognize 
that when the potential is there, you can get that energy across, focused on it. 

What often happens is that 41.4's get locked into being fixed on one feeling, one fantasy, and can be fixed 
on a certain feeling or fantasy for a very long time, even throughout their whole life because it is this 
fixedness that is there. But there is a great advantage in that fixedness. 

The line is called Correction. Successful adaptation to limitation. The limitation is, "I am a fuel. I am not 
a potential." The limitation is very basic. In this line, the Earth is exalted. When we have the Earth 
exalted, you recognize that it is part of a regular cycle of the Earth. It is something that is going to happen 
twice a year. It is a very strong grounding force in that sense. Out of the Earth, we get our basic security. 

Here, we have a classic line. Survival of the fittest-in the Darwinian concept-and its eventual flourishing. 
The fixedness of humanity on a feeling, on a fantasy, guaranteed that it would be the top of the food 

chain. We are to be at the top of the food chain. The survival of the fittest is our movement. The survival 
of the fittest is the perfection that comes out of being unidirectional in one's fantasy and feeling, to get 
there finally, to be able to fly, to be able to go to space, to do whatever the case may be and to be fixed on 
that. 

The Venusian side: The expenditure of energy on maintaining relationships rather than on correction. It 
immediately goes back into the powerful relationship field. In times of decrease, weak associations are 
shunned as costly, no matter how attractive. The survival of the fittest is that you are always in the 
process that you are fixed on but you have to adapt along the way. Otherwise, you will never get to your 
goal. 

Here, the focus is different. The focus is pulled out to the other. Remember that the fourth and fifth lines 
will always go across. By being pulled out to the other, it loses its fixedness, but it maintains the 
relationships. That is the other side of it. You have the fantasy that you want to be able to do something in 
a certain way and the people that you are with do not want to do it that way. They want to do something 
that is similar, but their way. You do not want to lose them so you go along with that. Thus, you lose that 
fixedness which is very important. These people can end up being very frustrated because they don't get 
to live out this experience. 

About 50,000 years ago, we got to the point of this line. It was probably around the same time that we 
began to have relationships with animals in which we could not simply kill them but control them. 

41.5 Authorization 

The first line always gives you the essential truth of the hexagram, but the fifth line is always how it is 
perceived by the world around us. We know that when we are dealing with the structure of a hexagram, 
we are dealing with a resonance within a hexagram, the music within a hexagram. The first line is in 
resonance with the fourth line, the second with the fifth, and the third with the sixth. The foundation of 
knowing what a fantasy is leads to being able to externalize that fantasy and being fixed on getting that 
feeling out. In the second line, we saw the capacity to project out this fuel, this pressure within you, this 
resource for all these feelings and fantasies within you. When we get to the fifth line, we come to 
somebody who automatically is going to have projected on them that they have this resource, that they 
have the feeling and the fantasy. "1 know that person will go along with me. I know that they have the 
same feeling I have." This is projected onto that person. They may or may not. 

This fifth line is called Authorization. Think about this in evolutionary terms. This is the stage of our 
evolutionary process that we are in now. We have given authority (we have projected authority) onto this 
essential process of experience. From the moment that we entered into this stage of our development, we 
have had more experiences than we could ever possibly have imagined earlier. The 20th century is full of 
more human experiences than have ever existed in the whole history of the planet up until now. We have 
given authority to the experiential way. This is what it is to be human. Vas go after this and that, and we 
go to Mars and the stars, etc., until we finally shake hands with God. 

Authorization. The external recognition of one's potential despite limitations. Think about the nature of 
what it is to have any root gate that has no natural outlet. You have this powerful motor with all this 
essential fuel, all this essential resource material waiting for that opportunity, waiting within the limitation 
of only being fuel. Do not attribute awareness to any of these gates. They are not aware; they are fuels. 
That fuel is not a potential. The 30 is the potential, the 36 is the possibility and the manifestation does not 
come until you get all the way up to the Progress in the throat. There is a lot of limitation in just having 
the fantasy or the resource of the feeling. You may never get them out. 

Think about the 41.5. They have a greater chance to release their feelings and fantasies than anybody else 
on Earth because everybody else is ready to project on them that they have a feeling and a fantasy. So, 
these people are always at risk because they can end up just firing rockets. Everybody comes up to them 
and says, "Aha. I know that you want to do this with me. Let me provide you with the potential, okay?" 

Mars exalted. That tells you something right away. Whenever you see Mars exalted you know that this is 
all about just let it go.' The value of energy when properly channeled. There are people in America who 
asked me if this was a channeling line. The answer is yes. It is written here. Properly channeled energy is 
the whole thing. 'Channeling' in English means to allow the energy to flow properly. The moment that 
somebody comes up to you and recognizes your capacity to feel or to have a fantasy and they offer you 
that opportunity, they can do exactly what this gate is all about. You can focus on releasing that feeling or 
fantasy and getting it out. The immature Mars means to get the feeling out right away, and then it is over. 
That is the limitation. 

The fuel for properly channeled feelings despite limitations. These people are always being projected 
upon. They are always given these opportunities. These people are not well. Remember that about them. 
They can be but, like all things that have to do with powerful energies that are not part of an awareness, 
given the nature of how human beings see themselves, this can present a great many problems because 
everybody is projecting on these people, "You feel for me. Your fantasy and my fantasy are one." They 
are constantly having people project on them, constantly pulling out that fuel at the same time. So, these 
people can go through a roller coaster of feelings and fantasies. They get burdened by crisis in their 
process. 

Venus in detriment. Look at the fourth line and the fifth lines which are the only social lines. We have a 
collective stream and we know that it is deeply social. It is about the development of humanity, and 
Venus rules the world. It rules our planet. Venus is in charge of our morals and is responsible for 
establishing, within the human environment, within the human community, what is right and wrong. It 
establishes our basic values which then get translated into our cultural styles, our interrelationships with 
each other. And yet, in both of these lines, Venus is in detriment. Because the moment that you are 
dealing with fantasy and feeling and its complete capacity, whatever Venus thinks is right, it will look for 
some wrong and whatever Venus sees that is wrong, the stream will look for something else anyway. In 
other words, the basic values always get broken in this process. They have to because everything needs to 
be experienced. The moment you have a good guy, you have a bad guy. 

Limitations initiate the fuel for negative feelings. Think about what that is like for a 41.5, when somebody 
comes up to them and says, "I am deaf, dumb and blind. Could you give me three bucks?" It is very 
difficult for them not to give the energy and, after a while, they get very dissatisfied with other human 
beings feeding on their fuel. After all, the capacity of the five is that it is at the end of the hexagram 
process. The six is beyond that. It knows the game. When I say 'know', I mean this in the genetic sense. It 
is built into it. It knows that one feeling at a time is correct and it has to be its feeling. It is great to share it 
but it has to be its own feeling, not simply yanked out by everyone. 

Wherever you see a fifth line, you have the theme of being victimized, used by others, in that sense, 
because they can so easily project onto you that you have that inherent capacity. The nature of the fifth 
line is always this balance on either side. That is, to have others project on you is a great value and a great 
opportunity. These people do get the opportunity to experience so many feelings and fantasies in their 
lives because others will project on them and give them that opportunity to release it. But at the same 
time, so many of those opportunities to experience are not really for them to experience. It is simply 
because it is so easy to hook into that energy and pull it out. If you have the line and you are aware of the 
mechanism, it is not that you can change the impact of somebody hooking into it but, by being aware of 

what is happening, it is much less attractive to be pulled out of your limitation. This is the whole thing 
about having energy. 

I have a defined ego. I will offer my willpower sometimes to others, but not always. Before I became 
aware of that energy, I was always empowering everybody around me with my will. I do not do that 
anymore. It is not something that I trained myself. It is a byproduct of being aware of your own nature. It 
is one of those things that come with the recognition of mechanics. 

The other thing that we always have as a footnote to any of these discussions is that any of these aspects, 
any of these lines, can only be seen in the context of somebody's design. How those things are going to 
operate and how they will function is always dependent on the nature of somebody's design. For so many 
people that will have the same line, it is a different configuration. You have 41.5's that are connected to 
the Sacral and it is always generating, but it is only really correct for them when they are responding, so 
they have different rules. 

You have manifestors with the 41.5, where the energy might go through the spleen and go up to the throat 
and they can always manifest this energy. You have people who have undefined root centers, or you have 
41.5's connected to the 30, not connected to the sacral or the throat. These people are called Projectors. 
What that means is that they have to be recognized by others; otherwise, they can never experience their 
process. Whatever the line is, it always ends up of being a matter of what kind of definition is there. It is 
always the key to how the energy will ultimately come out in the life. 

41.6 Contagion 

When you get to the sixth line, please keep in mind that we are looking at this 41st hexagram as a key to 
understand our human evolutionary process. When I say human evolutionary process, I do mean strictly 
that. This time frame that we have, in which we are in these kinds of vehicles and functioning the way we 
do, we are at the stage of the fifth line, but we are not yet at the stage of the sixth line. We will first deal 
with the mutation that will bring about the awakening of what we call emotional consciousness, or spirit 
consciousness. But there is something else that has to take place. One of the more mysterious things that 
the Voice told me about our evolutionary process is that when the change comes, when we lose these 
vehicles and we go on to our next process, that this stream that starts in the 41 and goes all the way up, 
will disappear. It will not exist anymore and this reality is built into this line. 

Contagion. The law that the maximization of potential not only ends decrease (ends feeling, ends fantasy) 
but inevitably such transcendence benefits others. 

Think about how I describe what the nature of emotional or spirit consciousness is like. We have 
emotional waves that are being generated and, between those waves as they interact with each other, there 
is a field, an interactive field, a field where the consciousness actually will exist. We do not understand 
such a thing. It is not possible anyway to understand it in the logical sense of the word. This is something 
where our experience of consciousness will be outside of our individual bodies and will not be our own 
consciousness, but it will be a consciousness that we are sharing with somebody else, or a group of 
people, or ultimately, a planetary field. Something that is in a slow developing process. 

When you get to the sixth line of a hexagram, you get to the roof of the house. You get to the end of the 
process. We know that we find the potential of wisdom in every sixth line and, therefore, it is less likely 
to function in the nature of what the hexagram is than any of the other lines. It says, "What for?" and 
"Why should I? I want to see the whole thing." You cannot see the whole experiential field. It is not 
possible. The law is that the maximization of potential ends in decrease, ends this process of constantly 
needing another experience. This process of constantly going from one thing to the next will come to an 

end. But inevitably such transcendence (after all, it is transcendence we are talking about here) benefits 
others. At the moment that we are no longer looking for the new experience, we are all in one thing 
together, as long as there is not the drive within humanity that it has to be more. 

Saturn exalted. The maximization of the potential of form. The father (or the mother) whose success will 
benefit his children. It is very important to understand that the children of Homo sapiens, if you look at 
this from the mystical side, will be something else. This transition out of the experiential way, its 
completion, will lead to the transcendence that not those who do transcend will experience. They will go 
through a period of discomfort, but what follows will benefit from all of that. 

By the way, that has mundane applications as well, like all lines. The 41.6, when it can make a fuelling 
commitment to an energy, can ultimately benefit others through that and be of value. It is called 
Contagion. They can lead all kinds of human beings into an experiential trend. These people can be 
trendsetters. But ultimately, the major trend, the ultimate trend, the mystical trend, is when we have a lack 
of experience: when the need for experience, the desire for experience, is left behind. That is when the 
process is complete. We are not there yet. 

Pluto in detriment. The tendency in transcendence to keep it a secret in fear of being deprived of its 
special advantages. This is what we are going to experience in the next century. The way in which 
evolution works is that we will have pockets all over the planet of different kinds of creatures, like us, that 
have different capacities than we do, not in any science fiction sense of the word but simply in that they 
will begin to experience each other, from the moment of birth, in a consciousness field that they will not 
be able to describe. In most cases, they will never share it with anybody else because it will seem rather 
bizarre. They will be the ones that are different in the way in which experience is initiated because they 
will stop it. You will have a generation of children who are born that will have the 41, 30, 36, 35 and they 
would not appear to us to be abstract at all. They themselves will have a feeling of almost being stuck. 
They will be the root of cults in the next century that will say that, not only is it all coming to an end, but 
they are already dying from it, that there is no place to go, that there is nowhere for humanity to go, that 
humanity is going to die out. They will have a lot of confirmation of that because it will look like that. We 
will have a vast decrease in population. 

Here in the white book: The fuel for recognition through feelings; and The fuel for secret or repressed 
feelings. Be careful with the words 'repressed feelings'. Ultimately, that is what is going to take place, in 
that sense. The first thing that will happen is that these feelings will be repressed. The need for 
experience, the need for fantasy will be repressed, not repressed in the unhealthy sense that we use this 
language now, but simply because that is going to be the genetic capacity to start holding back this need 
for more experience. 

Please understand that we are moving towards a time in which we need to be vastly organized, organized 
in the most intimate way. That organization comes out of the logical field which requires repetition and 
experimentation, and not out of the abstract field. What will happen here is that the whole abstract field 
will begin to be repressed and if you meet a 41.6, you will see that if you ask them, "Do you fantasize a 
lot?" they say, "No." "Are you full of all these feelings?" "No." The mechanism is already at work and 
goes along with the sixth line quality of why should I? It is already at work. 

Transit: Uranus in 41.6 

The Human Design System is a Uranian system, and wherever Uranus goes in the wheel is significant for 
humanity. Every 84 years, Uranus comes to the 41st gate. This time that Uranus is there, it is going to 
initiate an 84 year cycle that will culminate with the beginning of this transition. It will take well over a 
thousand years for humanity to get to this sixth line. It will not happen tomorrow or in the next century. 

Evolution on the human scale is a very slow process. This emotional spirit consciousness has already 
been with us for thousands of years and yet, we did not have any tools to really be able to look at it until 
very recently. 

In the children that are born with Uranus in 41, particularly those who are born with Uranus in the 41.6, 
they will begin the pull43ack in this experiential way. They will be the first generation of abstract children 
(it is depending on the design) who do not seem to function that way. These children, in our time, over the 
next 20 years, will be clinically looked at as being repressed. "No, my Johnny does not want to try to ride 
a bicycle. I do not understand it. I can't get him on the bicycle. I think that he is afraid of bicycles." It is 
simply because this is beginning to work and Uranus is initiating this new experience, especially in the 
sixth line. Uranus will bring that out in the children, so that there is already this genetic field that is 
beginning to operate and the children who are born with the 41.6 will be alive deep into the next century. 
They carry this energy with them and keep the aura of this energy alive in the world. They are setting the 
foundation for this transition. 

You can see some of that now in what people call the AIDS epidemic. One of the things about the stream 
41 to 35 is that it is the most sexual of all the streams. It is literally rooted in sexuality for the experience 
and that experience can be anything. In that sense, you can already see that this repression of those things 
is something that will come very strongly. 

You will have a reaction to this in the environment until all of the experiences, the feelings and desires 
that we acquaint with being human will slowly be repressed, be restricted, so that we can become more 
and more organized without constantly being dragged out of the organization by the need of the abstract 
person to have a different kind of feeling. "You are designed to be an architect". "I know but I have this 
feeling that I want to be an astronaut. " The planet has to eliminate this other side that automatically pulls 
you to say, "Yes, but wouldn't it be great if...?" 

For us, nothing that I am describing is particularly pleasant. For us, we are part of the aura of the fifth line 
where we give authority to experience. Without experience, you do not know. That is why we have virtual 
reality. Nobody gets the experience, vie already have vast movements at work to take us out of needing to 
physically have the experience ourselves, and yet, we have come into the world in a time where it still has 
its authority. We will have its authority for hundreds of years. There will be a great reaction to that. In 
your work over the next years, it is important to recognize that, as these children are coming on a stream, 
particularly children that come with the 41.6, they cannot be pushed into the experiential way by their 
parents. They will become very ill because they are the first generation that is there not to get pulled into 
that. They have to be aloof from it. 

The experiential drive is coming to an end. The whole experiential nature of being human is coming to an 
end. In other words, we are at the flourishing of that. We are getting so many experiences. We are 
collecting so much data. We will now go down the other side. Ever since Neptune left 61, we are going 
down the other side, the other slope. Everything is being reduced. We start to pull things back. We are not 
driven into new experiences anymore. We are locked into old experiences, trying to stay alive and survive 
and flourish. We will not look for something new, but we will go back to the basics. 

The deepest event in the next century will be that the fertility capacity in humans will be devastated. We 
have to go back to basic things and be very well organized in order to keep the species alive. We will not 
be able to tolerate all kinds of drives for different experiences when the species itself is threatened. These 
are all mechanisms that will come into work in the next century. 

It is like the project to Mars. They spend 256 million dollars to get it there. They are spending about 1 12 
million dollars a day tracking it. When somebody comes along in the next century and says, "Okay, now 

that we have gone to Mars, why don't we go to Pluto?" There will be people who say, "Wait a minute. 
Why? We could take all of this money and give it to starving children and poor people. " We have to stay 
with the basics of what we need to have to be organized properly. It is not to say that we won't do things, 
but the pragmatism of what it is to keep humanity alive will restrict the way we use resources. That is 
what the 41 is all about. It is wonderful to look at the pictures they took of Mars, but we come to the point 
where people reject that. Resources have to go back into our hands to increase our fertility. 

HEXAGRAM 42 INCREASE 

We are dealing with the collective process here. We are dealing with the collective power of the sacral 
center. One of the things to recognize about the nature of the collective, and it is something that you 
should always keep in mind when you are looking at somebody's chart or definition, that the collective is 
not personal. The whole nature of collective circuitry is that, inherent in it is the capacity and the need to 
be able to share. The reality is that it is the most social of all circuitry and, in that sense, it is the most 
social of all energy. It is energy that is there to be shared for collective purposes. The collective abstract 
process is about the energy for experience. 

It is very important to understand that our abstract process defines the nature of what it is to be alive in 
the world. It defines what it is to be human and what our human process is: that is, moving from one 
experience to another so that we can learn from that experience. When we begin here with the 42nd 
hexagram, Increase, we begin with this process of the energy or the power to be able to complete the 
necessary energy in order to be able to make a commitment to a life experience. So, the 42nd hexagram 
starts this process of energizing the possibility of being able to go through a complete experience. 

It says above the lines: The expansion of the resources which maximizes the development of full 
potential. The full potential to go through the human experience. This channel, Maturation, is a design of 
balanced development. Yet, everybody who deals with the nature of the abstract is always saying, "Yes, 
wait a minute, now." It is full of crisis, change and instability. There is all this emotional up and down 
that goes with it. But this is the human experiential way. 

42.1 Diversification 

First lines always speak for the nature of the hexagram. The first line is called Diversification. This is not 
synthesis. This is not the first line of the third hexagram. This is diversification. This is literally the 
foundation of the experiential way. That is: not to do the same thing twice. This is the lesson for the 
abstract person. "Do it once, have the experience, put it in your bank account and go on to the next thing." 
The essence begins with diversification. 

Sun exalted. The ability when surplus resources are available to extend one's activities beyond their 
normal scope. On the logic side, we are stuck with patterns and habits. That is the logic side. It is about 
patterns and habits which lock you into a fixed way of living out your process. The abstract comes along 
and says, "I have to go beyond these patterns and habits in order to have my experience." The surplus 
resources to go beyond just the strict patterns to find that additional experience. 

Venus in detriment. A tendency when surplus resources are available to centrifugal application. 
Decadence. In the white book it says: Growth through expansion, particularly when defined to the root; or 
Too much expansion can lead to decadence. Now look, the decadence in this is what happens to your 
energy the moment that you are placing your energy commitments in too many places. This is something 
that comes back to one of the most important things that you can do in a reading for people. 

When people have a defined sacral center, people who are generators by nature, for them to understand 
that only when their sacral center makes the commitment as "uh-huh" are they really going to have the 
energy and not descend into decadence. What so often happens to sacral people is that they make their 
decisions in life based on other places (their emotional system, their throat or their mind) and, in doing so, 
they literally do become decadent in the way they are using their energy because most of that energy is 
not going towards their process experientially but is being fed off to others. 

This can create all kinds of energy problems in the human being themselves, aside from the dilemma of 
people who say, "You have broken your word, your promise or this commitment." The 42 is always under 
pressure to finish things, so it can feel very guilty when it can't finish things. This is the decadence that 
can come in. Without the clarity to understand where the energy goes. Remember that there is no 
awareness here. There is the energy to grow and complete but there is no awareness. There is the energy 
to be diversified, but how diversified? How far out do you go? How many different experiences do you 
go after? Are they really for you? If they are not, they will eat up your energy. 

42.2 Identification 

The first line, due to its introspective nature, recognizes that it has a resource and that those resources can 
be available for all kinds of diversity. It does not know what to do with it but nonetheless, it knows that 
that is there. When you come to the second line, the projective line, you know that they do not know 
whether they have the resources or not. What they are doing is that they are projecting out that they have 
their resources. 

The line is called Identification. Sun exalted. Recognition and acute capitalization of trends. Remember 
that somebody who has anything in the abstract process is always interested in a new experience that 
comes along. They are the first ones. When I go and give public lectures, the room is filled with 1 1 /56's. 
They just come and say, "Aha, a new idea, something new and different to think about! Some new 
possible experience!" The identification is literally being able to make your energy (projected) available, 
and then the diversity is shown to you, in that sense. 

The whole thing about that is that you don't really know, as a second line, whether you really have the 
resources. You can identify that. You can recognize that straight away, "Aha, there is an experience, a 
new thing that is available to me." You are projecting out but you don't really know if it is for you. You 
do not really know if you can handle it. This is not about awareness. 

The Venusian detriment: An ascetically motivated withdrawal in times of progressive change. These are 
people that are projecting out their resource and then, all of a sudden, everything around them changes 
and there is this sense that what they are projecting out does not fit in anymore. In other words, on both 
sides of this line is this capacity to be able to project out exactly into a new experience to see whether one 
has what it takes or not. Or, at the very same time, to recognize that there is something different going on, 
some new experience that is available, but not feeling equipped. Remember that the second line always 
has this dilemma of not knowing whether or not there is the necessary depth, the necessary tools. 

In the white book: Power for growth through participating in trends. The moment that these people see a 
new trend, they can project their energy into it. The other side of this is: Growth which stops in reaction to 
trends or change. Because, all of a sudden, they are out of step. They can be in step or they can be out of 
step, but it is all a projection. There is no guarantee of the depth underneath. 

42.3 Trial and Error 

Everything that we have been talking about in terms of third lines, here, you get to see the archetype of 
what a third line is. After all, when you are dealing with the abstract, you are dealing with the experiential 
way. You are dealing with the human process and the keynote of the third line is Trial and Error. This is 
the term that we have been using: trial and error, bonds made and broken. In times of increase... You can 
substitute growth for 'increase'. This is the maturing process. How we grow is through trial and error. 
...mistakes are a natural part of the process. 

Mars exalted. The energy and assertion to turn mistakes into advantages. This is so difficult for people to 
recognize. What they call a mistake is only a point on an arc of a path. It is not something that you have to 
go back to. We do not go back to anything. We are flying at 445,000 kilometers an hour in space. You 
cannot turn around at that speed. You can't even put on the brakes at that speed. There is nothing to do 
about that. It is very important to understand that. So look, the mistakes become advantages. That is the 
nature of growth. 

In this line you see a phenomenon that all parents know with their children. When children are young and 
they get sick with a fever, they grow. If you measure them two days later, they have grown. You can look 
at the sickness and say, "Oh, my goodness. Here is a failure. The child is not well. I did not look after it 
properly." The fact is that that illness is an advantage because the illness itself is part of the growth 
process. Otherwise, it would not be there. It is very important to understand the essence of trial and error. 
We have an obsession with 'no mistakes.' No mistakes? You might as well die because there is no growth 
and maturity and there is no process. 

On the other side of this, the Moon in detriment. A moodiness that in error may succumb to brooding and 
unnecessary caution. "Oh, I made a mistake. It is terrible. I have to be careful next time. I will not do that 
again." 

The power to accept mistakes as part of the growth. Here is Mars, the twelve-year-old child in all its 
glory. This is one of the best positions you can have for Mars in your design. Mars saying, "Yes, I have 
the power to grow." 

Mistakes give power to moodiness and caution. Trial and error really is the essence. Remember that the 
resonance to the third line is always the sixth line, the possibility for a profound mutation, for a transition 
to take place. Growth is rooted in trial and error. 

42.4 The Middle Man 

When you come to the fourth line, you come to the upper trigram. We now have a transpersonal process. 
There is this recognition of what is at the other end of the channel and so we have a totally different 
process. Always remember the limitation that is there in the first three lines: this deep involvement in the 
nature of the gate itself. "I have the resources, I project the resources, I adapt to the resources." But it is 
still within itself. 

When you get to the fourth line, you get to something different. This transpersonal is the beginning of the 
recognition that, in order for experience to be achieved, it has to be achieved through union with others, in 
consort or connection with others. This line, by the way, is a line that I have seen in, I think now, seven 
different midwives. 

This line is called The middle man. It should probably be called the midwife. This would be a great line to 
call the midwife because this is the energy to provide the resources by being in the middle, in mediation, 
providing the resources for others. In other words, there is this intrinsic recognition that the maturity 
cannot be established alone. 

The Moon exalted. The quintessential manifestation of the mediator. On the Venusian side we have: the 
gift to establish and maintain relationships is ill-suited in this position to act in mediation, where harmony 
must take a back seat to pragmatism. This is about using these resources carefully, not simply working on 
the social level of recognizing that there is another end of the channel. 

Remember that collective circuitry is, by its very nature, social. So, underneath all of these lines is lying 
this social imperative that says, "I have to share this." Here in the fourth line it is, "I have to share my 
resources." What happens is that, in the detriment, they get caught up in the social aspect, trying to make 
sure that everybody is harmonious and that everything is okay, instead of putting the energy into their real 
business. That is like a woman being in labor and the midwife is putting her energy into trying to be 
harmonic with this woman who is in labor, instead of putting her energy right there to what the process is. 

There are times when the social aspect takes away from the necessary pragmatism. These are people that 
have wonderful energy but, so often, their energy is used by other people. Their resources are given away 
to others simply because they want to establish a harmonic social environment and that becomes more 
important than just pragmatically using the energy. 

The maturity to bring growth through mediation. To bring growth to the collective, in that sense, by 
having the resources. Fourth lines are very fixed. "I am fixed on having to give my resources to others. I 
have to share my resources with others." 

In the detriment we have: A lack of maturity where the power to harmonize distorts mediation and limits 
growth. If you are so busy trying to make sure that your client who is in labor is going to like you as a 
person, you may have all kinds of difficulties in the actual birthing because the energy is in the wrong 
place. It is like the surgeon who is cutting open your heart and listening to rock and roll at the same time 
and gets lost in the song, and you end up with a pair of scissors inside. 

42.5 Self-actualization 

Look at the incredible resonance in this gate. The first line and the fourth line, the second and the fifth 
line, all have Venus in detriment. Here is a fundamentally collective process and the Venus in detriment 
always brings out problems because it brings out the problems of being over-concerned about the social 
aspect of experience. This is not about the social aspects of experience. It is about the pragmatism of 
recognizing the nature of the experience itself but you can see that the Venusian power here can distort 
the resources. 

Remember that, in the first line, we always have the essence, to diversify the resources, and when we get 
to the fifth line, we get to see how the world looks at it. The world calls it Self-actualization. They project 
on the 42.5: "Aha, they have the resources to be able to go through a process and grow. They are the ones 
who are mature." This is a very funny thing. 42.5's are always being projected on that they are the mature 
ones. "They are so mature for their age." This is the flavor that comes with the 42.5. 

The Sun exalted. The fulfillment and actualization of purpose as a natural path, whose reward is a healthy 
sense of self, rather than the power and influence that naturally follow. This projecting out, this projection 
on them that they have the resources, the fact that they can bring that out: the moment that somebody 
projects on you that you are something,' it becomes easier and easier to live it out. If somebody keeps on 
projecting on you that you have power, then you have power. These people are projected on all the time 
that they have the resources. So they have them. Maybe not always, but most of the time, they do. 

The Venusian detriment. Self-actualization as a strictly inner experience that may demand or result in a 
reclusive nature. This is not the fourth that says, "I must share because I am the resonance of 
diversification. I have to share with everybody. I have to be in the middle." The resonance to the five is 
the two, which is to be identified with here. 

The detriment here is not really a detriment. It is simply that this growth power is going to be "my own" 
growth power. "I have an inner growth process rather than helping you with your growth process. You 

can project on me that I have the resources for you, but I do not identify with where you are going and I 
will not give you that energy." 

The two sides of this in the white book: Growth that is self-fulfilling and naturally leads to influence, or 
Inner growth that empowers reclusiveness. "I will do my own experience." These are often people that do 
things that nobody else knows about. They have this mask in their life. You work with them for five years 
and then you discover that twice a year they take off all their clothes, they paint their body and they 
slaughter animals and do weird religious acts. You don't know that because it is a reclusive inner 
experience that they will not share with you. 

I had a reading with some guy, a really insecure and uncomfortable, strange sort of creature, working in a 
government job in Munich. I got to a place in the reading which triggered something for him and he said, 
"I've just been through that." And I asked, "You have been through what?" "Oh, last week, I have been 
doing fire walking." I looked at this guy and thought, 'fire walking.' 42.5. These are people that have 
hidden experiences in their life, so they have a lot of things that they have actually done but they do not 
tell anybody about. That can range from anything, to anywhere because the abstract circuit, being what it 
is, anything is possible in the experiential field. They are very secretive, in that sense, about the nature of 
their inner experiences. 

42.6 Nurturing 

When you get to the sixth line and you get to transition, you get to the classic situation in which the sixth 
line does not necessarily want to release what is there, unless there is much more to it. After all, the whole 
nature of the abstract process is to go through experience so that, at the end of that experience, when you 
have completed that process, you can reflect upon that process and out of that comes your maturity. Out 
of that comes what we call history: the ability to be able to share with others the nature of your 
experience. 

Here, when you get to it in the white book it is very clear: The power to share the process of growth with 
others. Perhaps. You only share the process of growth if the experience can be seen, in that sense; if they 
can believe that it is going to lead to that kind of growth. That is full of all kinds of 'ifs', 'buts,' 'maybes', 
'should haves', 'could haves', and 'I don't knows'. They are not necessarily going to share it, but they can. 

On the other side we have: The refusal to share the benefits of growth with others. The Nurturing, in the 
black book: A natural and instinctive nurturing of others. Saturn in detriment. A restrictive and malefic 
materialism that is selfalienating and encourages aggression. 

This is one of the sixth lines that can get a lot of hostility because everybody knows that they have the 
resources and everybody is saying, "Why don't you give these things out. You are collective and this is 
about sharing. We want it." 

So they can go to the extreme, and again, this is dependent on the nature of the design, whether the center 
is defined and how this operates. They can get to the point where they react in that way only to use their 
resources for their own benefit. 

Materialism, in the sense that energy has value. I am somebody that has three motors open. I know how 
valuable energy is. I teach on your adrenaline. It is not mine. I know how valuable it is. That adrenaline 
energy is a necessary currency. Without it, there is no fuel for the process. 

People who carry energy gates like this are carrying wealth within them. The moment that the energy is 
used properly, the growth comes and then you reap the harvest of whatever has grown. The harvest in life 

is to come to grips with what it is to be human, what it is to be alive, what it is to live out the experiential 
way. Like all sixth lines, it is not certain whether or not it is worthwhile, whether it can trust that the 
process is valuable for its growth. 

This wonderful joke: where does the 42.6 lead to? To Synthesis in the 3.1. It starts with Diversification 
and you get to the end of the whole thing and you say, "Well, yes, all this diversity is terrific, but what 
does it all mean?" That is what the sixth line is thinking about. What does it all mean? Not just this 
experience. What you get from the nature of the sixth line is that they are not ready to make the mistake 
that is made in the third line. They are saying "What for? What do I have to go through that for? I am not 
really sure that it is of value to me." There is always a hesitancy in the sixth line because there is this 
inherent sense of "Yeah, but what else?" 

HEXAGRAM 43 BREAKTHROUGH 

We move to the individual process, to the 43 hexagram and we come to the channel of 
Structuring, a design of individuality, from genius to freak. We have the gate of insight, sudden 
awareness, the possibility of spontaneous individual knowing, or not. Whether that knowing is of 
value for anybody else is another story. The awareness possibility is spontaneous resolution, 
the voice of the muse, the inner ear. This is the inner acoustic mind. 

This is not a visual mind. What is going on in the 43 rd gate is that there is an inner dialogue. It 
goes on in the whole stream and that sudden awareness is an inner-dialogue awareness. "Oh, I 
knows," it says on the inside. Whether it can actually say that on the outside is another story. It 
is a very particular path to translate that sudden awareness, that inner dialogue, into an 
externalized dialogue that can explain itself. That is quite a process. 

In the Rave I'Ching it says, In order for achievement to be maintained a new order must be 

fairly established. The only achievement for the 43 rd gate is the ability to explain their knowing. 
Unless they can properly explain their knowing, they are not going to feel like they can achieve. 
So, they can be very frustrated in that and it all resonates back to the process in the 28th 
hexagram: "Is life really worthwhile?" Or you go to the resonance in the 57 th hexagram that 
says, "Am I afraid of tomorrow?" The knower is afraid of tomorrow if they know that, tomorrow, 
they will have to explain themselves and they don't know if they can. 

Because the individual is always attracting attention, they will also attract rejection. If they 
cannot explain themselves, they will be rejected. So, there is a deep anxiety, the fear of the 
mind, that no one will know what they mean. "They don't know me. They don't know what I 
mean. They don't know what I want." The counseling that I give all individuals is that they have 
to learn how to communicate so that they can develop the skills necessary to explain 
themselves. 

43.1 Patience 

The introspection here is called Patience. Pluto exalted. The recognition that new forms (new 
knowing) can not be established until resistance has been eliminated. "Is it really a knowing? Do 
I really know it?" This is the examination of the knowing. 

Venus in detriment. An impatience to enjoy the sweets of accomplishment that inevitably leaves 
a sour taste in the mouth. Knowers get attention with their "I know". If they don't go through the 
introspection, they can end up in a lot., difficulty. 

The depth necessary to bring into form an individual insight. That is to really know what you 
know. To know your knowing,, you have to go into it. 

On the other side of this: A delight in the insight but a lack of depth to establish it. Suddenly, 
there is this sense of "Ah, I know," but can you really explain that to somebody else? The 
detriment side knows that it can't. It gets up on "Oh, I know" and what happens to these people 
is that when they meet another individual who says exactly the same thing, they look at them 
and say "I know" and they feel good because they themselves have great difficulty in getting 
that out. 

It is the first line that demonstrates the nature of the hexagram. That sudden awareness is 
something that either leads to the demands of depth, to go into it deeply, know your knowing, or 

it comes out on the other side where there is no ability to express it. So many knowers cannot 
express their knowing. 

Please keep in mind that, statistically, there is more of this channel than there is of the 1 1/56 or 
the 17/62. This channel is an opposition in the zodiac and you get it a lot. Most of the time, 
when you are getting the 43, you are getting the 23 with it. One of the unusual things about 
these channels that form oppositions is that when you get one, you automatically get the other 
with it. So knowers, from the mental, the awareness perspective, are often automatically 
connected to their throat. It is very different from idea people and opinion people. Nine times out 
of ten, these 43's already have access to the throat and this is much more common than others. 
It changes the way that you look at this. In ten charts that have this channel activated, you will 
find seven of them who have the whole channel. The opposition is a very common thing. Please 
keep that in mind when we go through these lines: often they automatically have their 
connection to the throat. 

This creates a real dilemma for these people. They do not have the basic restriction that is there 
on the 1 1 and the 1 7, who do not automatically have the outlet and who have a restriction on 
their process. The knowers do not have that. Generally speaking, the moment the knower has 
that "Aha, I know," everybody hears, . 

43.2 Dedication 

These people talk out loud. They do not know if anybody listens to them. They are the kind of 
people walking around the house and, all of a sudden, you hear them. "Oh, I knowl" And you 
wonder who they are talking to. It simply comes of the projection. 

This line is called Dedication. Pluto exalted. The maintenance of specialized attitudes which 
promote breakthrough. These people can have linguistic tics, for example, repeating things out 
loud again and again. "The sky is blue. The sky is blue... I know." That is their way of going 
through their knowing. When they are learning something, they may have a very specialized 
out-loud-technique for learning that drives other people crazy. That may seem weird to other 
people but that is their process on getting it through. 

Unique mental habits and thought processes which promote insight. I guarantee that, for much 
of history, these people were considered mad because, all of a sudden, they blurt things out and 
you wonder whether they are possessed by the devil. This is a freak channel. People who have 
the 43.2 are easily possessed, in that sense. They can feel possessed. 

The other side has Moon in detriment. A dedication to action that, when actualization is in sight, 
may become incautious. In most cases, that is what happens because the 23 is already 
available at the other end. So, they can automatically just blurt out whatever that knowing is in 
the moment, which can seem absurd to somebody else. That is not to say that it cannot be of 
enormous value as well. Do not misunderstand that. 

The urge for expression that will abandon its normal processes when an opportunity arises. 
There is a wonderful description of a surgeon in a book written by Oliver Sacks, who has 
Tourette's syndrome and he has hand and foot tics. There is this wonderful scene of him in the 
infirmary room with the other surgeons, just before he has to do an operation. He is lying on. the 
floor and he has his feet up on somebody and his hands are going all around, and he is 
repeating "I know, I know," and then he goes into the operating room and it is gone. He is a 
great surgeon and people love him. 

All the funny stuff that the 43.2 can do, given the right circumstances, instantaneously, that is 
gone and the other side of them can come out and they can seem quite normal, just to protect 
themselves, because they are freaks anyway. (By the way, this doctor flew an airplane.) 

The physical tics of that are related to the emotional system, and the acoustic tics are related to 
the mind. One of the gifts that lie in acoustic tics, that is in this unusual way the mind works, is 
the repetition of sounds which leads to excellent language skills. You have to recognize about 
the 43/23 that the 43, when it hears a sound, is trying to figure out how to translate it in order to 
figure out how to explain it. It is not turning the picture into a word; it is turning the inner sound 
into an outer sound. There are a great many language skills that are involved in this. You have a 
lot of mimics here as well. 

43.3 Expediency 

We come to the end of the upper trigram. We come to bonds made and broken and the theme 
of irresponsibility. It is called Expediency. The third line has the potential in it to be both 
introspective and projective, and it is looking to the other side for the first time. But again, we 
have to keep in mind that, in most cases, 43's have the 23 on the other side. 

Pluto exalted. The powerful drive for regeneration that will, when breakthrough (their knowing) is 
threatened, use any means, align with any force and endure any condemnation to achieve the 
goal. I knew this very well. It is my South Node line. 

Moon i n detriment. An oversensitiviy to condemnation that may preclude justified expediency 
and result in failure. The nature of this third line is to get one's knowing out no matter what, 
which of course can be very dangerous. If you do not know what you are talking about, you will 
be in a lot of trouble. 

A certainly in knowing that can withstand condemnation. I know this so well in respectltb Human 
Design. What I '(now about the nature of my experience with the Voice and the information that I 
was given, it did not matter how many people told me that I was crazy. It made no difference to 
me. I did not listen to them. My knowing was very clear. The capacity to withstand 
condemnation. 

On the other side: Individual insight abandoned in the face of condemnation. The teal dilemma 
of the knower is whether or not you will be able to live with your own knowing. For a great many 
people, this is a constant dilemma: "Can I continue to project my knowing out and put up with 
having all these people say, 'You are wrong.'?" This is something every knower goes through. 
My first reaction after my experience with the voice was "Oh, no, do I really have to do this? Do I 
have to put up with all these people saying 'Oh, no.'?" You align with any force. 

43.4 The One-track mind 

Here, we get to externalization and you get to the line that gives its name to what I am 
describing to you as a theme, this One-track mind. These people can drive you mad. Knowing 
is something that is very difficult to get across to everybody else. These people are fixed on one 
knowing, whatever that knowing happens to be. They are incredibly persistent in that knowing. 

Mercury exalted. The over-reliance and stubborn obsession with one's mental abilities in the 
face of recurring obstacles. This design, given Mercurial mental gifts may, though rarely, 

succeed. Jupiter in detriment. A belief in inherent right action based on limited knowledge that 
shuns advice. "I know, and you don't." Even if somebody is standing there telling them very 
calmly and clearly that they are wrong and explains to them why 1 and 1 equals 2 and not 76, 
they still insist on their "I know." Their knowing can be extremely stubborn. They are really fixed 
in their knowing. 

A stubborn reliance on one's unique insights that demands focused mental ability to be properly 
conceptualized. They may be of enormous value and they may be Galileo's that are shunned all 
of their lives and may have real brilliance within them, or they can just be rockers (as 'in racking 
one's brains'), which is the other side of the coin. You get everything in that spectrum. This is 
the key to people that have this line. "Okay, you are fixed on this knowing, so get it very clear so 
that other people can grasp it. If you cannot explain it, you will be shunned, and if you are fixed 
on it, you appear to be an obsessive. You have to be able to explain it." 

The other side is: The vanity to attempt expression without depth. These are people that know 
the moment they come into the world. If they could speak, they would tell their mothers that they 
are doing a lousy job. "I know what you should do with me." They will claim that authority the 
moment they come into the world. 

43.5 Progression 

We reach the point within the hexagram where the process is complete. You get to Progression. 
This a fascinating line because the emphasis of this line is about understanding the nature of 
the other. The fifth line already recognizes its knowing when it is there. It has its knowing, but its 
greatest concern is not about what it knows but whether it is able to get its knowing across to 
the other side. The only way these people can do that is when they have a deep understanding 
of the other, so that they are able to recognize when and with whom they can get their knowing 
out. This is the whole thing about the knower. That is why you have the 12/22 as a social 
channel for the individual, this capacity to recognize within the mood when it is the right timing, 
when is it a good time to go out as an individual and to offer your knowing and explanation. 

Moon exalted. The step by step adaptation to relationships which hinders breakthrough through 
practical actions that will not jeopardize eventual success. "First, let me seduce them and, if I 
succeed in seducing them, then I will give them my knowing because then it will be easier 
because then they are already ready to accept me rather than treating me as a freak. I can't just 
throw my knowing at them. I am not the second line." 

Venus in detriment. A tendency to concentrate on harmonizing relationships that tends to 
strengthen the position of restrictive forces rather than benefiting breakthrough. You seduce 
them and become their friend. You finally tell them your knowing and they tell you, "Yes, yes, I 
know you. That does not work." This is very difficult. What happens to the fifth line is that they 
are very concerned about what people think about them. The fifth line is afraid of being burned 
at the stake. They recognize that their knowing can always be dangerous for them unless they 
can have a good relationship with the people. That is the key in their process. 

The gift of knowing when a unique insight can be shared effectively with others. The other side 
of this: An over-reliance on the receptivity of others that turns harmony into the conditioner of 
individual expression. "I won't say what I really know because I will lose them as my friend." This 
can be deeply frustrating for the knower. I recommend to people with this line: their dilemma is 
no longer whether they can explain themselves or not. Their dilemma is: do they really 

understand people? Unless they understand people, they will have difficulty in getting their 
knowing across. 

43.6 Breakthrough 

Here we have the line of transition. This line is about mutation. Once you get to the end of the 
process in the 43rd gate, the sixth line is no longer interested in the knowing itself, but whether 
the knowing is mutative. Only when it is mutative, it is really something. It is looking for that One 
night stand, the Blaze of glory, whatever you want to call it. It is looking for something that is 
beyond the knowing. It is the capacity to recognize that the individual process can always be 
mutative, and it is looking for the mutative potential. This line goes through an enormous 
transformation when knowing occurs. 

Breakthrough. Sun exalted. Actualization and centering, that in breakthrough naturally establish 
both internally and externally a new order. Everything gets wiped out in that. The moment that 
the new knowing is there, the only thing that is interesting is that, in this kind of mind, it is 
already mutative. It will erase all kinds of things. It will be the knowing that this mind is focused 
on, not focused in terms of explaining it, but waiting for the mutation to take hold. It is always 
about looking to see where the mutation can be. 

On the Martian side: An ego tendency that in breakthrough sees justification of its lesser 
attributes and carries them over into the new order. 

In the white book, you have: Unique knowing that is both personally and collectively of value. It 
is of value, but these people won't tell you their knowing because they are only interested in 
mutation. I know this so well. I have people who come up to me after a lecture or a course and 
they say to me, "This is so interesting." That does not mean anything to me. If somebody is 
saying to a 43.6, "Your knowing is interesting," they will look at you "Oh, my god. Keep these 
people away from me." The 43.6 says to itself, "Of course it is interesting, you fool. It is 
knowing." It is something that is there to be mutative. The 43.6 people have a sense of 
aloofness (44.6) in that: "The knowing is not for you because you will not mutate with this 
knowing." 

The other side is: Where the value of knowing is more important than other aspects of life. This 
is where this line can be weird. This is the mad scientist who is so absorbed in his knowing that 
they forget to wash or eat or sleep. They forget the world outside, their children and their family. 
They are gone in their knowing and can be very deluded in that, hoping for the possibility of 
mutation to come along. 

HEXAGRAM 44 COMING TO MEET 

We will shift to the possibilities and, in doing so, understand that there is an unseen process that takes 
place. There is a movement between potential and possibility. It uses the language of the mind to describe 
it. I call it conceptualizing. One has to divorce oneself from thinking that conceptualizing is a word that 
describes a mental process. Let's take the assumption that this is a word we can use to describe the 
awareness process, which requires a leap. There is a jump, like neurons firing in the brain. There 
is a jump that takes place between the potential and the possibility. This is a very special place. Because 
we know that we deal with a wave environment at the emotional level and a frequency environment at the 
awareness level, we know that there is a movement in the frequency from the potential to the possibility. 

One of the things that we will see as we go through our process with the lines is that you can almost read 
what takes place in between the lines. When you go for example to the 44.1, that started in the 32.1 and 
there is a process of conceptualizing to bring the possibility of that awareness to a point of clarity. This is 
a very special place. One of the things to keep in mind is that when you come to doing your own line 
studies, you will discover that, as you move through the lines, this movement becomes visible. You can 
see what is taking place as a conceptualizing process moving from the potential to the possibility. 

The 44th hexagram and the 24th hexagram that is opposite it, the 19th and the 33rd hexagram form a 
cross in the zodiac. It is called the cross of The Four Ways. Coming to Meet is one of the four ways, the 
only one that is healthy. What you have to keep in mind about the relationship between the splenic and 
the heart center is that this is the only place where they meet. The thymus gland sits in the 26th gate and 
our lymphatic system is rooted in the 44th gate. Out of these two is where our basic protective system is 
developed: the B-cells are produced in the 44th gate and the T-cells are produced in the 26th gate. 
Together they form the healthiest channel that we have. The nice joke is that the healthiest way is the 
material way. This is very true because we have 10 million children born each week that are born hungry 
It is obvious they are not healthy because they are lacking material sustenance. 

In the hierarchy, we see that the 44th gate, in terms of this material movement, is the personnel manager. 
It is the great nose. It can smell anything. That is what it is there for. The gate of alertness: Coming to 
Meet. It says here (above the lines in the original white book), the possibility is the transformation stored 
or not as a memory. 

Remember that the 32nd gate, the potential in this stream, is the potential to recognize what can be 
transformed, or not. Once the 32nd gate (the financial officer) says, "I am going to spend my money on 
it," at that moment, the 44th gate is ready to take that and store it as a memory. It stores what that is and 
works with it. When it is stored as a memory in the 44th gate, then they know exactly that the 26 will be 
able to carry that out. After all, the 44 cannot do it itself. The splenic system is not a motor. It is looking 
for the ego and its willpower in order to fulfill whatever this transformation potential is. It is one thing for 
the 54 to come up with the energy for the transformation. It is another thing for the 32 to say, "All right, 
we will commit to it." It is yet another thing for the 44 to go looking for the right ego, but it still has to get 
out there and manifest in the end. 

The awareness possibility is the osmotic regulator. This is cellular memory. This is the water balance. 
This is where the cellular memory is at its deepest. This is the pure gate of instinct, which means that the 
first and second lines that are instinctive themes represent the deepest cellular memory that you are going 
to find in a human being. These people have a very, very rich memory system. This is a spontaneous 
memory. Do not forget that we are dealing with an existential center. This is not a memory that can be 
called up. The 26th gate is the ability to manipulate, The Taming Power of the Great. The memory in the 
44 is available instinctively in the moment, and it is there to recognize what is the right ego and what isn't 

to fulfill the transformation. The personnel manager always has to surrender to the financial officer's 
decision. 

In the 32nd hexagram the heading was: The only thing that endures is change, and when you come the 
heading of the 44th hexagram you have: The success of any interaction is based on the absence of any 
preconditions. There are no preconditions. There is the instinctive memory of what is necessary which 
will simply respond in the now to the right relationship, to the right interaction in order to fulfill the 
transformation. 

44.1 Conditions 

Whenever you are dealing with first lines, you are dealing with the keynote of introspection. We know 
that this is the foundation of the hexagram and this first line is a classic example of what a foundation 
really means because it establishes the basic nature of what Coming to Meet is all about. This is one of 
the four ways. It is called Conditions. It says, The establishment of frameworks as the result of 
interaction. This is what surrender is all about: it has to take place within a specific framework. Here is 
this transformation we want to bring about. Here is the framework of how it gets done. 

Pluto exalted. A mastery of the collective that can establish restrictive conditions for inferior components 
with the ability to enforce them. Think about that. This is the foundation of this hexagram. It starts with 
the mastery of the collective. This is very important to understand. 

This is one of the four ways to our well43eing and our health, to our financial success. Everything in the 
tribe is about establishing the hierarchy, which has to be established rigidly in the corporate culture; 
otherwise, the culture will fail. Even in the most liberal corporate institutions, the hierarchy remains, no 
matter whether everybody is dressing in jeans and calls each other by the first name or not. All 
organizations are rooted in hierarchy and the 44th gate is there, not only to recognize who can fulfill the 
transformation, but who will honor (this is the tribe) the hierarchy and be loyal. 

The other side is Venus in detriment. An attractive nature that will interact with inferior forces and will 
fail to apply restrictions, resulting in a risk to continued harmony. There is no success on the material 
plane unless the hierarchy is properly established and the moment that there is a failure to apply 
restrictions is the moment that not the end result but the harmony is damaged. It becomes so obvious that 
if you raise a child without any restrictions, somehow that is not going to be good. The first thing you 
discover is that restrictions are natural. It is about what kind of restrictions, not about whether they should 
be there or not. The hierarchy requires its pattern, after all. 

Here in the white book: An alertness to patterns that can lead to mastery of the collective. First of all, that 
is based on memory. If you do not really know what the transformation is about, for example, if you do 
not know, as a personnel manager, what your product is and of what value it is to be community, you will 
not be able to choose the right person to present that in terms of their ego. 

The failure of the instinct out of the need for harmony. "I do not want to tell you that I am the boss 
because I want you to be my friend." This is the other side of it. The first thing to recognize about the 
nature of the first line, about the nature of conditions, is that this is the root of our material success. It 
requires that we establish conditions. If we do not establish conditions, we will not have our proper health 
and we will not have our success on the material plane. Being an anarchist, it is very funny for me to say 
those things. 

When you are working at any commercial level, there are two kinds of managers: people managers and 
goal oriented managers. The first line is about the people manager. This is really the foundation. 

Remember that when you are starting with the lower trigram, it is involved with its own process and is 
not really ready to go across to the other side of the channel. The special-ness of the first line is that it is 
already conscious of the need (it is an awareness gate after all) of how important it is to work with the 
right people, and find the right people. 

44.2 Management 

When you get to the second line, you get to a line of projection. All second lines are projection outwards, 
with the inability to be introspective. They cannot look inwards, which means that they are not looking 
for the people. They are looking towards: Can we get to the goal? Due to that, they can often make 
mistakes with the people because they are more interested in the goal. 

When you look at the second line, it is called Management. This is interesting because the nature of most 
commercial enterprises is that they are goal oriented rather than being people oriented. If I was running a 
large corporation and I was looking at my personnel staff, I would make sure that both first lines and 
second lines were there. In other words, it is one thing to be goal orientated but the other thing is that you 
need to have the right people in that process. 

Jupiter exalted. The development and management of a proper collective structure which restricts inferior 
elements by creating cooperative modes that integrate these forces with progressive and superior forces. If 
you have lousy people who are working for you, it is okay. Integrate them with people who do better and 
maybe they will be all right. This is what gets done all the time. This is a very common practice. "They 
are not doing very well. We will put them with Harry." 

On the other side of this is Mars in detriment. A tendency in management to concentrate exclusively on 
goals, ignoring inferior elements, which leads inevitably to quantitative success and qualitative failure. 
The second line is good at getting the goals done. They will find an ego that will get the work done but 
that will lead to a lot of problems in the human organization. Every time that we are looking at the 44/26, 
we are looking at the most important health movement that we have. So, if it will be a qualitative failure, 
it is ultimately not going to be good, neither for the corporation nor for the workers or for the consumers 
(or whoever it is that is involved in the product) because it is not essentially healthy. On the other hand, 
like all of these things, if you have somebody who is only interested in goals and that is their design, and 
they have the second line and are working in a company that is only interested in goals, good for them. 
After all, you are here to be what you are. 

This is not a moral question. This is simply about recognizing that in these first two lines, because they 
are the instinctive themes, here lies the core of the way in which we work together. It is the core and the 
way in which we are brought together by those who can be responsible for that. It is two-sided. One side 
overemphasizes the human element, and the other overemphasizes the goal element. This is the beginning 
of the hexagram process. 

44.3 Interference 

This is the line of adaptation and the end of the lower trigram process. In this line, we have the two earlier 
processes integrated together. Here, we have the line of Interference. The failure to interact based on 
circumstances. This is a keen sense of what the ego is on the other side because this is the first line that 
recognizes that there is an ego on the other side and has a sensory connection to it. 

Mars exalted. The ability to recognize the threat of interference and to prepare for its effects. Neptune in 
detriment. A deluded response to interference that gets stuck in projection and, as a result, is unrealistic in 
appraisal and errorprone. Remember that third lines can be very irresponsible. Third lines, by their very 

nature, know that there is an ego at the other side. In this particular case, they do not really know what it 
is and how it works. They have to connect to it and learn that. 

In the Book of Letters: The alertness and instincts to handle the ego of others. That capability does not 
mean that they will interact with the ego. The 44.3's have a lot of trouble getting through this whole 
channel. They make the contact with the ego and on this side can recognize it, but the moment that the 
splenic system actually meets the ego, there is fear in the splenic system. It is the fear of the past. This 
fear brings to the 44th gate this sense of, "Oh, this ego is very powerful and I can get carried away on its 
energy." After all, the 44th hexagram is about dominating, being able to manage the ego power at the 
other end. The ego is not aware, but it is a motor and the 44 would like to have contact to that motor 
because it is healthy and turns on the system. At the same time, when the 44 makes contact, it is cautious 
because it senses the power of the ego. 

It is like when you get on a horse for the first time and suddenly you recognize, "I am high above the 
ground and this is a big animal and I do not know what it thinks and it will do weird things." So, when 
you make contact with the horse, you say, "I'll get off now." This is what happens to the 44. It hooks into 
the ego and says, "Wait a minute. I'll get off." This is the reverse of what Coming to Meet is. They come 
to meet, but they go away very quickly. 

On the other side of the line: The possibility that the instinct cannot handle the ego of others. This is 
where it really steps back. It steps into the ego field, catches it all and says, "I really do not want to deal 
with that because that is too much for me." (Irresponsible in coming to meet.) A manager with this line 
makes bonds and breaks them. He hires a strong ego who does a wonderful job, but he fires him because 
the 44 can't stand the person's ego. It does not matter how good they have done the job. Or, that very 
manager meets somebody who he knows would do a terrific job but he refuses to work with that one, so 
he does not hire them at all. 

44.4 Honesty 

The fourth line is the beginning of the upper trigram and its direct resonance is to the first line. Due to that 
resonance, you know that being a people manager is a deep theme that already matured by the time that 
you get to the fourth line. The fourth line is an externalization line and, therefore, has a single track. It is 
deeply fixed on one aspect. Here, this aspect is called Honesty. It says: The refusal to engage in 
hypocritical interaction. These are people whose management style is considered to be straight forward. 
They are very direct. 

Pluto exalted. Indifference at its most logical and cutting. The indifference is to the needs of the 
individual. After all, this is taking the people-manager resonance from the first line. There is this deep 
indifference to all this stuff about having to work really hard to make sure that the other is really 
comfortable with all this. 

By the time you get to the fourth line, you know that there is something on the other side and the only 
way the fourth line is able to work with them is that it is very direct with them. 

The Sun in detriment, that in extreme situations, in cases of self-sustainment, will expect assistance from 
forces it has totally rejected. Here the honesty is the genuine need. You want to do business with 
somebody and, being a fourth line, you are very direct and say, "Look, I am not in the ABC business, I 
am in the XYZ business, go away." Two years later, you discover that you want to get into the ABC 
business and you call up the very people you rejected and you can actually say to them, "Why don't you 
come over and we'll talk. Now, I am interested in the ABC business." This is all about being direct. This 

directness can seem obsessive because there is nothing else there. They can only be focused in that 
honesty, in that one transformation that they want to bring about. 

The indifference possible when guided by the instinctive memory. In other words, you really know the 
type, so why mess around? Put it straight to them. 

On the other side: The sacrifice of indifference for survival. In other words, when a change can come (this 
is all about transformation) then they can go back to the very thing that they rejected, being very honest 
and being seen that way. 

44.5 Manipulation 

The fifth line is the finish of the hexagram process. Here you have the completion of what the hexagram 
is all about. Within the hexagram, you have the ability to universalize the process. Please understand in 
this sense that the 44/26 represents the immune system of the tribe. It is the defense system for the tribe. It 
is what keeps the tribe healthy. This material reality, this fifth line, represents literally what that is all 
about: what is going to keep the tribe immune from disease, immune from failure at the material level. 
The 32nd gate was the fear of failure and the 44th gate is the fear of the past and they are trying to 
overcome those fears through having material success in the present. 

The fifth line is called Manipulation. The ability to transform interaction with inferior elements into the 
energizing of progressive processes with the additional benefit that, in tapping the inferior elements, they 
remain weak. Think about the nature of that. That is, you cannot have everybody climb the ladder of the 
hierarchy. This does not work and yet, at the same time, inferior elements being part of the tribe need to 
have their sustenance, need to be protected and need to have a sense of self-worth within the community. 

The gift of this sort of manipulation is to integrate these forces into the operation and allow them to have 
their place by making them comfortable through the manipulating style of the personnel manager and, at 
the same time, have them be satisfied that they will spend 55 years plugging bolds into the side of a car. 
This is absolutely essential on this planet. Otherwise things fall apart. 

On the other side of this, Mars in detriment. The tendency in this form of manipulation to become abusive 
and degenerate to their level. This is the dictatorial fiat. This is the need for control in the 32nd gate. Here, 
in the detriment of the fifth line of the 44, it becomes the power trip. "I have the power and you don't. 
You do what you are told." I can be very abusive. 

In the Book of Letters: Where the instinctive recognitions of the patterns leads to the possible 
manipulation of others. Again, manipulation without any negative connotation. Without a proper 
hierarchy, there is no success. I have grown up in North America which was rooted in the idea that the 
traditional hierarchical caste systems could be replaced, so that they would throw away the ideas of 
monarchy and institute republics. If you go to North America today, they simply replaced that with the 
monetary class system: how much money you make. The moment they meet you, they want to know how 
much money you make because then they can put you into a place within the hierarchy. 

The fact of the matter is that, if you are working for a company and you are getting well paid relative to 
what you do, you don't mind that the CEO is taking home two million dollars. It astonishes me how many 
employees find it quite normal that the boss is making this enormous fortune while they are slaving for 
forty-eight hours a week. However, this is natural to us. This is our way. We are animals. Animals are all 
hierarchical, no matter how sophisticated we look as a patina on the surface. Everything is about 
hierarchy, and it will not go away. The thing is not to see that as a moral, or prejudice. You have to see 

that everybody has a place that way. As long as everybody is in the place that is correct for them, no hard 
feelings and everything will be fine. 

44.6 Aloofness 

When we come to the sixth line, we come to the roof of the house, and there we have nothing but the deep 
desire for transition. Here it is called Aloofness. If you have a hexagram that is called Coming to Meet 
and you get to the sixth line and it is called Aloofness, you know that this whole process of looking for 
the ego is past. It is not about looking for the ego. It has to be there, of course, because it is part of the 
way that you get out: you get to the throat and to manifestation. The sixth line is always looking for 
something much grander, in that sense. Be aware of something: all sixth lines have within them a 
potential to be deeply depressed. This ability to stand on the top of the house, to be finished with the 
process and to be able to look out beyond and wonder what is there and long for it because it is the 
resonance to the One Night Stand: it may come or it may not. You may get that opportunity or you may 
not. Because of that, there is this sense of, in the aloofness, "Nobody is really going to fulfill that for me. I 
will not get that quality of ego that will lead far beyond all of this material plane that the personnel 
manager is locked into." 

Pluto exalted. A perfected renewal in which the establishment of a new form inures one to the 
condemnation of the rejected. This is somebody who has their growing up and they end up finding 
themselves moving, for example, towards a career where they could have this kind of work. They would 
never stay there. They could never live out the personnel manager as a personnel manager. There is 
always something else that is further beyond for them. What is further beyond is the new form: something 
that is going to change the way that whole hierarchical structure operates. 

The awareness of patterns, which ensures one's instinctive well-being. They do not need the ego on the 
other side. They are not lusting after it because they can be well within themselves. 

On the other side: The awareness of patterns that can bolster the ego at the expense of the well-being of 
others. This has nothing to do with being concerned about just any other ego on the other side. It is about 
something else. 

Until they find that 'something else', they can never commit themselves to the power that is there. Their 
ability is to recognize a very special quality of ego that will be, in the mystical sense, a real surrender and 
that what gets transmitted is something totally new. All sixth lines can infuse the collective with 
something that they are not yet aware of. All sixth lines, because they are collective themes, can go deep 
into the collective. This is where the collective gets constantly enriched from the individual, from the 
tribe, so that the collective slowly becomes this umbrella that we all can live within. A very important role 
here in the 44th gate. 

HEXAGRAM 45 GATHERING TOGETHER 

The 45th gate is the only outlet for the entire tribal process, so this gate carries with it an enormous 
importance that is part of our evolutionary process. There will be a time, long away from now, when the 
45 will actually become aware and will be part of what we now consider an ajna process. The 45 is very 
important. It is the only voice in the throat that is a purely possessive voice and therefore it is the only 
place within the Throat in which the manifestation of possession takes place. To have and not have, to get 
and not get, to be able to control and not control: all this is rooted in the nature of the 45. 

The 45 is a gate of action. It is directly connected to the ego and, in that sense, very different from the 35 
and the 12 that are connected to the solar plex. It is not operating in the wave of the solar plex. It is 
operating out of the energy of the ego which we call willpower or, when we are being negative, egoism. 

The 45 is the gate of the tribal leader. This is not the collective leadership of the 31. This is the tribal 
leader, the leader by blood. This is the queen and the king. This is the lord and the lady. This is the 
leading family in a community. This is all this kind of blood hierarchy. 

Above the lines is says: The natural and generally beneficial attraction of like forces. The keyword here is 
'beneficial.' This is the nature of the 45. The responsibility of the king and queen, regardless of whether 
they are pashas or not, or possessive or not, regardless of whether they have to have the nicest crown and 
throne, their power lies in them being of benefit to the tribe. As long as they can be of benefit to the tribe, 
they can indulge in anything, including decadence. As long as their benefit is there for the tribe, they are 
of value. 

45.1 Canvassing 

When you begin with the first line, you begin with the inherent recognition that to be a 45 is to be, by 
your very nature, beneficial to the tribe. That does not mean that you get to exercise that beneficence. 
After all, if you do not have the other side, then you always have to wait for the energy to come. 

The first line is called Canvassing which is: The ability to promote and develop gathering together 
through the education of the uncommitted. Mars in detriment. An over-zealousness that turns canvassing 
into proselytization and tends to alienate rather than gather support. This is all about education. 

In terms of the white book: The material direction lies in education, or The drive for material that leads to 
aggressive education. 

The whole thing about being the leader of the tribe is that the way in which the tribe benefits is by being 
educated. The more educated the community, the more successful it becomes. We live in an age in which 
we have watched this historically over the last 300 years: the development of public education and the 
vast improvement in the nature of our lives and the ability for us to have representative democracies in 
which the population as a whole is given a responsibility for the direction of the people. This is the 
byproduct of education. The key to the nature of the 45 is that, if they can bring education to the tribe, 
they are always going to be of benefit, which means they themselves have to be educated. 

It is very important for 45's to be educated and, of course, this is a joke because all aristocracy has been 
privileged in having education while the rest of humanity was left behind. It is built into being a 45 that 
you must have a solid education because it is only out of that grounding that you can be of benefit to 
those that are in your community. 

At the mundane level, at the material level, this is about being successful in business when you can 
provide something new, something of educational value, something that the other does not know anything 
about. For example, the first person that brings the refrigerator into the community that never had one 
before. When the tribal leader brings the refrigerator and says, "Let me educate you about the benefits of 
this refrigerator. " You can be a salesman in a shop or you can be the tribal leader, but what you are trying 
to bring is of benefit. 

This is one of the keys to the 45. If the 45 is not providing something that is of benefit to the community, 
whatever they make, whatever money they bring into their lives, will poison them. I am being very heavy 
because it is accurate. This is the whole nature of possession. The 45 is allowed to possess. This is their 
nature. They have to possess. At the same time, out of their possession, they must bring benefit to others 
and it must be of value to others. If they just make money from the tribe, "Here I have the ABC box and 
you should all have my picture hanging in your house," that is not a leader benefiting the public because 
they have to buy that. They have to invest in that and, ultimately, the money that comes from that will be 
poisoned because it is not of benefit. The leader must bring things of benefit. The first line knows that its 
beneficence is there, but it does not necessarily know how to bring that to the tribe. 

45.2 Consensus 

The second line is projection, so you know what these people are projecting out. They project out that 
they can be the tribal leader and that they can be of benefit to others. The fact that this is a mechanical 
gate in the throat, a metamorphic gate, means that there are already built into these people techniques of 
bringing about this beneficial impact. 

The second line is called Consensus. Gathering together is strengthened by acknowledged common 
interest. Well, it does not work any other way. These people are projecting out that they can be of benefit. 
But they can only really be of benefit to those people that they can really be of benefit to. Otherwise, they 
are paper tigers and it may not turn out to be that way and they are uncomfortable. 

Uranus exalted. The inventiveness to establish techniques by which common ground can be assessed. So, 
there is a quality within these people that they can project out, which is that they can provide a beneficial 
technique to others. 

In the white book: A material direction through the expression of techniques for the benefit of others. 
Please, do not forget this beneficence. It always has to be built into this process. The difficulty with the 
second line is that, because they are projecting outwards, there are only certain people (this is not a 
transpersonal line) that they can really be of benefit for. They feel handicapped by those people for which 
they are not of benefit. 

They end up with the pressure of the other side, which is: An innate rebellion against conformityor, in 
terms of the white book: The refusal to accept the material techniques of others. That is like being the 
king and saying, "This is the way things work." And, instead of having a subject that says, "This is not for 
me," you have a subject that comes up to you and says to you, "Your technique is wrong." The 45.2 in 
detriment does not want to hear anything like that. They are not going to pay attention to somebody else 
telling them what and how the benefit should be. They are people that try to become the power behind the 
throne, and they try to control. These 45.2's can often get controlled from behind by other people. 

45.3 Exclusion 

Most difficult in the 45 is the third line. So many third lines are difficult simply because they are involved 
in this trial and error process. Because the wave is about bonds made and broken, this is extremely 

difficult for a tribal leader. The bond for a tribal leader is only broken when they die. This is something 
that is clear for them in the nature of their process. This is not an official that you can un-elect. This is a 
tribal leader. You either kill them or you wait until they die, but they are going to be the leader until they 
die. This is the way we used to live with kings in this world. 

This line is called Exclusion. It says: The ability when excluded to take whatever measures are necessary 
to dissolve the antiquated form and to accept even humiliation to achieve inclusion. These are people who 
know that they are the ones that can bring the benefits but they do not always get that recognition. 
Because so often in their growing process, they offer a benefit that they can bring, and there is a mistake 
involved and it does not really work out, due to that, they don't necessarily trust themselves. Nor do the 
others who hook into that energy trust them that there really is something that can work. Yet at the same 
time, because it is in their blood, it is in their genetics to be a leader, they will do anything, including 
accepting humiliation, to get close to that center of power, so that they can eventually have their 
opportunity to be beneficial to others. The instinct to find a way to be included in a material process. 

The other side is: The expression of frustration when not included in a material process. This is as it says 
in the black book: An aggressive and often violent reaction to exclusion. For example: succession in a 
family. You have five children and one of them becomes the ruler of the tribe. One of those children 
realizes within themselves that they are the one that can bring a better benefit to the tribe and that they 
will be a better leader, but they have to accept the humiliation of not being the leader and still stay close 
to the leadership. On the positive side, they make their contribution that way. They will slowly try to 
educate the one that is really in power to get the benefits out somehow so that they can participate in that 
process. But, if they have the detriment, then they hire an assassin and they kill their sibling and they take 
over the throne. Or the producer who controls the film instead of the director. The director has to suffer 
the humiliation of putting up with the producer saying, "You have to do this and that." And slowly, the 
director tries to find a way in which he can influence the producer, so that it comes out beneficially the 
way he wants. Of course, in the extreme, you kill the producer. 

45.4 Direction 

When you come to the upper trigram, you come to the fourth line. You come to externalization, to this 
fixed recognition that, first of all, there is another side. The 45/21 never works properly when it is inside 
somebody's chart. If you see somebody who has this whole channel, you know that they will always have 
difficulties. This is a channel that is designed to be electro-magnetic, in order to be at its most effective. 
The awareness in the fourth line is the recognition and the mechanic that there is a force on the other side, 
the 21, the power of the ego to drive this whole process. The fourth line is called Direction. This is a fixed 
externalization of being of benefit. That is what it is all about. 

The ability to focus the opportunity of gathering together for the service of higher principles. 'Higher 
principles' means: is it of benefit? That is all. Don't get caught up in thinking that is has to be spiritual or 
mystical. It has to do with the mundane plane and being able to provide for the tribe. When it comes to 
the tribe, the highest principles are food, shelter and health. That is number one. After that, there are all 
these different levels. Higher principles mean that, whatever the source of the material plane is, it has to 
bring benefit to those who will receive all of that. 

On the other side, we have Mars in detriment. The tendency to try to influence the direction of a group 
action for personal benefit. That is okay. It is the same process. These people make sure that, while they 
are being of benefit to everybody else, they are really of benefit to themselves as well. They are not just 
simply fixed on externalizing their beneficial value to others. 

In the white book: The expression (or the lack of expression) of higher principles on the material plane. If 
you get involved in bringing false benefits to the community, this will always backlash against the 45, 
even if it is the 21 who does it. It is the 45 that has to take the responsibility for that. So, it is very 
important for 45 's to recognize that whatever they are involved in on the material plane, they have to see 
the direct benefit of their work. If they cannot see the direct benefit of their work, they are in the wrong 
kind of work because it is going to bring back all kinds of negative energy into their life. The other thing 
is, like in all fourth lines, it waits for opportunity. 

45.5 Leadership 

You get to the fifth line and you get to universalization. Again, this is the way in which the community, 
the tribe, will project onto this fifth-line person. It is always projected onto them that they really are the 
leader. These are people that naturally can be made leaders in a community because the community will 
project this quality onto them. Whether you are dealing with the exalted or the detriment in this line, there 
is very little difference, other than that the detriment talks about the immature process. It is about what it 
takes to slowly develop that recognition because it is built in. 

This line is called Leadership. All gathering must have a center and a focus. This is about the leader. They 
are the center, the focus. They are the one. Uranus exalted. The intuitive intellect and gift for innovation 
that enhance the group effort and ensure continuity through respect for the center. They are projected on 
to be the tribal authority and, in the exalted side, they have the capacity to live that out. 

The gift for expressing leadership on the material plane. By the way, the way a 45 expresses their 
leadership is always being able to educate others so that they can benefit, which means that they direct. 
They tell people what to do; they don't do the doing themselves. That is why the 21 connected to the 45 in 
a chart is of no value whatsoever to the 45, because the 45 then says, "I have to do." This is not for them 
to do. They have to educate and provide the benefit, but it is for the tribe to work out those benefits, to go 
through that process. 

The Jupiter in detriment. A sense of right action that assumes a respect that may not as yet have been 
earned. This side is the difficulty for the child. This is the situation where the child itself recognizes its 
leadership quality but, of course, leadership is something that you have to establish. You have to be able 
to show that you can do it. When you are young, you do not have that experience. So, the reality is that 
these children seem very arrogant, very aristocratic. They can feel like, "I am a pasha and everything 
should come to me now," instead of waiting until the time comes that they can really earn that by truly 
being of benefit to others. Again, they are the product of the projection field on them. 

In the white book: The drive for leadership that may not have yet earned the right. What I say to these 
people is, "That is okay. You will eventually get the respect. You just keep on working on your process." 
That is what it is all about. 

45.6 Reconsideration 

This 45.6 is very extraordinary because it goes directly to the 12.1. The 12th gate is the gate called 
Standstill. Standstill is where mutation is spread. It is out of 12th gate, which is a mutative gate, that we 
first got our voice. It is the gate in which all mutation gets to manifest out into the world. The 45.6 is 
looking directly at this individual mutative process and its social capacity to spread that mutation. The 
45.6 is the kind of tribal leader that makes the tribe very nervous because it is the only tribal leader that 
recognizes that, unless we integrate the strangers, the outsiders, into the tribe, the genetic pool of the tribe 
is going to die. 

Imagine what that is like if it is a family business. The head of the family business says, "The only way 
that this business is really going to grow now is if we stop having it as a family business. We put our 
shares on the stock market. We become a real corporation and we will bring in all these outsiders to help 
us in this process to expand." For members of the tribe, for members of that family, that can be very 
frightening because it is no longer a family community business. All of a sudden, outsiders are coming in. 

This sixth line, like all sixth lines, knows that it is not enough to be the tribal leader. "I don't want to be 
just this tribal leader. I don't want to sit in my tipi, in my village, living a primitive life for the rest of my 
days. I want a television, a computer..." The reality is that the sixth line recognizes the intrinsic value of 
the outsider. On one side: Let's just bring the outsiders in. On the other side: Once we have them in, let's 
control them so that the rest of the tribe is happy. 

So, you have all kinds of rulers in history. (Catherine the Great, who brought all the French philosophers 
into the court.) They brought the outsiders in to try to bring about a broader mutation in the tribe, so that 
the tribe would grow and become healthier, thus bringing a benefit from the outside. New genes, new 
blood, new ideas and new concepts. All of that is a threat to the tribe because the tribe likes its traditions. 
It does not expect its leaders to be heretics, but the reality is that their leader can turn around on them and 
say, "Yes, but I want to bring in all these foreign people because I think that this will be beneficial to our 
society." 

We all know what happens afterwards. We have that in our all modern countries where you have all kinds 
of immigration and then you have the native tribe and you bring in all these other forces, and after a while 
you get a backlash in all of that because the tribe gets upset. 

A material direction which serves the outsider; or A material direction that is focused on conditioning the 
outsider to conform. 

An outsider who can admit that its prior rejection was an error will generally be accepted into the 
gathering. To bring the outsiders in is the gift of the sixth line. An innate empathy with the outsider 
mentality and its eccentric and often misunderstood logic. This works on many levels, but the real level is 
that if you don't bring the strangers in, the tribe is going to fail. It is going to die. If you do not bring a 
stranger into the business, it is not going to be successful. 

Jupiter in detriment. Where Uranus will innovate to find a place for an outsider, Jupiter will demand that 
it conforms. "Okay, you are a stranger. You have come here and you have fallen in love with my 
daughter, and you do not come from the same tribe as me. I don't mind that you are here. You can be my 
son, but you have to behave like we behave here in this village. Bring your blood, but I am going to 
control you and make sure that you look like everybody else in the tribe, so that nobody gets upset and 
bothers my poor daughter because she has married this freak, this outsider." This is the sixth line saying, 
"Okay, you can come in as a stranger, but I will control you." 

All of this is about understanding that, rooted in the 45.6, is the opportunity for the tribe to mutate. If the 
tribe cannot mutate, we will have no changes in this world that are really of value. It is only when the 
tribe changes that the world changes. The collective is impersonal. The tribe is there in deep support for 
each other. Only when we can mutate the tribe are we going to have eventual mutation in the way that we 
live with each other and the way we share the resources of the world. 

HEXAGRAM 46 PUSHING UPWARD 

Keep something in mind about our work in Human Design. It is a logical system and, as such, it is there 
to provide a framework in education for people so that they understand the basic mechanics of their 
nature. The nature of love in the world has nothing to do with hugging and kissing, though all that is very 
nice, but with making sure that people are being educated from the earliest possible age. Without that 
education, human beings do not have a possibility to see that what they are is not an embarrassment. 

What they are is not something that has to be refined and improved. It is not something that has to be 
perfected because it is exactly what it is supposed to be: an aspect of the totality, an aspect of the 
spectrum of things. 

We have a false prophecy about the nature of love. We assume that we generate love in the world by 
loving each other. This is a funny thing because this has nothing to do with what this love is all about. It 
has nothing to do with loving your guru, your friend or your dog. It has to do with being one with the 
creative process, accepting surrender for what it is to be you and seeing in that surrender your own 
beauty. Only when you find surrender in your own beauty, do you put love in the aura of the world. There 
is no other way, no matter how sweet and nice you are and how much love you have within yourself, and 
how much love you want to put out in the world; it is not going to change the aura of our planet. What 
changes the aura of our planet is human beings living their nature. That is the crux of what our work is, so 
that human beings can just live out their nature without the morality, without the conditioning, to see 
clearly what it is just to be themselves. That creates love in the world. We won't see that in our time. 

We have seen that the nature of the love of humanity (the 15th gate) is about the quality of the collective 
aura, and that is where the love of humanity is going to manifest. When we come to the 46th gate, we 
come to the body itself and we come to the flesh, and this is the moment that we step into our personal 
realm. In other words, this is not the generalized aura, but this is the physical body of humanity, which is 
our vehicles. The spiritual nature of the body is the body as a temple, that the flesh, to be in a body, is a 
holy thing. 

Above the lines it says: Good fortune that may be perceived as the result of serendipity (to be in the right 
place at the right time) but derives from effort and dedication. To maintain the body, its physical graces, 
its diet, its comfort and its shelter, is an ordeal. We all know that. This requires effort and dedication. To 
be dedicated to the body is to be dedicated to be in the life. This is the experiential stream of the abstract. 
This is the very humanist way. In the gates of the Vessel of Love, we have the collective being opposite to 
the individual. It is part of what the structure of the Vessel is all about. It is deeply personal and 
individual, in a sense, because the 46/29 as a channel has a quality to it. That quality is to keep the 
experience the prime focus. In other words, through the 46/29, when you enter into an experience, you 
enter into it and blindly release yourself to it. You literally fall into the experience. In doing so, only when 
you hit bottom, when the fall comes to an end, when you are through the experience, only then do you 
have an opportunity to reflect and only then is something gained from that experience. 

The 46 is extremely existential in its nature. What the 46 is all about is being in the experience that brings 
the good fortune, not necessarily the experience itself. This is what so few understand. If you look for 
something to come of your life, nothing will come, but if you are in your life, everything is possible. This 
is about being in the body and accepting its way. 

46.1 Being discovered 

The first line, as the foundation of this, is called Being discovered. Dedication in obscurity that is 
unexpectedly discovered. This is the whole secret of what this hexagram is all about. Every other place in 

the abstract process is loaded with expectation. If I do this and this, I will get that. The 46 says: shut up, 
just be. Just be in the experience for the sake of the experience and only then it can be productive. Then 
later, afterwards it can be productive through reflection, through seeing what you have actually been 
through, because if you stop in the middle, you break the flow, you break the continuity, you lose the 
value and you never have a chance to reflect. 

Neptune exalted. Art for art's sake. Any creative endeavor that is self-fulfilling sooner or later is 
recognized. I tell all of these people: just do your thing for the joy of it. Do not worry about whether it 
works or not, whether it is a success or not, whether you are loved or not. Just be in it because only then is 
good fortune possible. Then everybody will say that you were in the right place at the right time. 

In the white book: The potential for creative success through dedication. Just to be dedicated to the thing, 
to be in the experience, to be in your body. Think about it as your body. Just accept what it is to be you. 
To be lucky (all over the world people play lottery) can only happen if you are being yourself. To be 
lucky, in the abstract sense, is only when you are living out your nature. Only when you are living out the 
experience can good fortune come to you. Otherwise, it can't. Don't stop in the middle of the experience 
and ask yourself: why am I so unlucky? 

Jupiter in detriment. The ability to judge the potential of those in obscurity but often solely to benefit 
one's own success. The determination to recognize and benefit from the success of others. This is a deeply 
social channel that is rooted in the principle of success. It is 'succeeding where other people fail' or 'failing 
where other people succeed.' This is all about making the experience of being in the world worthwhile. It 
is the 29 that says yes to life, and it is the 46 that has to accept the life in the body, in the now, for what it 
is and to wait for its rewards. 

46.2 The Prima Donna 

We saw in the 15.2, that the second line was an advantage because it allowed the 15.2 to be seen as an 
extremist and, therefore, the opportunity of being left alone. When you bring that into the physical body, 
you come up with The Prima Donna. Everybody looks inside of this person and thinks they see somebody 
who always thinks that they are in the right place at the right time, doing the right thing. Of course, other 
people can feel quite uncomfortable with that. 

The Sun exalted. A difficult and demanding nature that succeeds despite its behavior because of the depth 
of its talents. 

The first two lines are deeply involved with the creative process, obviously. They lay a foundation for the 
whole hexagram. To accept what it is to be in any experience is inherently a creative process. You will 
learn from that. Out of reflection can come all sorts of advantages and rewards. 

Mars in detriment. Unrealistic demands and offensive nature of egocentric mediocrity. Very heavy 
sounding language. Nicer in the white book: The determination to succeed that may offend others, or The 
determination to be treated as a success before it has been realized. These people always think that they 
are in the right place at the right time and they have this air of what people do not like. Others have the 
sense of, "How come you feel like being in the right place at the right time and we don't?" But the 46.2 
does not know that. It is a second line. Other people look into them and see that the 46.2's are prima 
donnas for other people, and not for themselves. They are just in their experience. The 46.2 can be 
difficult for other people because they are in their experience, but in the end they will accept them. "They 
are eccentric, or they are terrible people, but they are deeply talented. Look at the way they dance." 

We are dealing with projection lines in the second and the fifth line, so there is a lot of projection going 
on. Humanity does not feel lucky. People don't feel lucky about their lives, as a generality. Luck is 
something that people hope and look for and dream about. If you see somebody who is really in their trip, 
these people do get rewards. They may get rewards even though they do not deserve them, which is really 
galling to other people. The 46.2, if they are in their experience, no matter how uncomfortable they are as 
a person for other people, tough. They should be in their experience even if it is mediocre. After all, not 
all experiences are great. 

46.3 Projection 

Third line is adaptive. It is part of the lower trigram. So, the first to the third line have the capacity to be 
in their experience, but what happens to them when they meet the other side is that it can either 
destabilize them, or not. 

In this line called Projection, we have the Moon exalted. A practical approach to good fortune that 
maintains the same patterns and attitudes that brought success and does not get side-tracked by indulging 
in further expectations. In the white book: The determination to stay with what brings success. Think 
about what happens to these people. They are third line, so they know that they have to be in their 
experience, and then they meet somebody and that person tries to pull them out of their experience 
because, the moment they meet them, they say, "What are you doing? Can we do this? Do you have some 
time?" and the third-line person tries to be in their experience, is deeply involved in something and 
someone taps them on the shoulder and say, "Excuse me, I have a problem. Can you help me?" 

The 46.3 has to stay with their thing. This is very practical for them. In other words, they meet the force 
on the other side but they have to try to get back to being in their experience because that is the only thing 
that will bring them success. Not what pulls them away. The 46.3 may end up annoying a lot of people 
who try to break into their experience while they are in there. 

Mars in detriment. A tendency through projection to treat a potential future as the present, leading to 
unjustified egoism and the loss of momentum and support. Here comes the ego again. The whole thing 
about projecting into the future is, the moment that you see that you have an experience, you realize that 
you need to stay with this experience, and it is not about the rewards you get, but about what you get 
done, what you get finished. For example, you start the morning and say, "I'll build this XYZ," because 
that is your pattern, because you want to be able to fulfill that. You want to be in the experience of doing 
that. You can be the kind of person that says to somebody, "This thing is going to be ready for you 
tomorrow." Well, this is not existential. The fact is that the third line does not know whether or not they 
will be left undisturbed because, the moment someone comes into their aura, it breaks that moment of 
experience. They may not get back to that successful pattern and may end up being somebody who 
sounds like they're always making promises and not keeping them. 

In the white book: The determination to treat a projected success as a reality. By the way, like all of these 
lines that sound negative, they are not. There are those 46.3's who, out of that experience, learn to find 
people in their lives that do not disturb them that way, because this is inherently social. They realize that 
when they meet 29's and they have to make a commitment, it is not the commitment that is important. It is 
the people that are important because all of this has to do with social context. The fact of the matter is that 
in the third lines we have the strongest learning process. This is our trial and error process, and it will take 
them time to live that out. 

46.4 Impact 

We are dealing with very specialized collective gates which, obviously, by their very nature are social, 
and we are dealing here with transpersonal lines. As I mentioned before, the 15 and the 46 have very 
unusual lines and here, we come to them in the major transpersonal lines in the fourth and fifth. Normally, 
the fifth line is exalted and the fourth line has its difficulties. Here you have fourth line that is exalted, and 
it is called Impact. 

The Earth exalted. It is there right from the beginning. The ability, once recognized, ('once recognized' 
means, though, that there is a process involved) to move rapidly from a position of obscurity to influence. 
These are people that know how to externalize their experience in the now. They know how to get other 
people not to get in their way. They are good at that because they are one-tracked. They are fixed on their 
experience but not to the point of exclusion of the other because they have social gifts. So, they know 
how to keep to their experience without alienating those people around them and by finding valuable 
allies to help them fulfill their experience. 

The moment that they are recognized, they rapidly move upwards because they have really good skills 
and they can stay in their experience. The only thing about these people is that their experience is 
everything and, though they have very good social skills and you really think that they are nice, and they 
may be, the fact is: they do not pay much attention to other people even though they have the social skills 
for them. They don't. They are in their experience. 

You see that more in the other side of this: Pluto in detriment. A reaction in achievement that tends to bite 
the hand that fed it. By the way, this is very much the propaganda of those people that have to meet the 
46.4. The fact is that they really are just in their experience. They can forget that you once helped them 
along that way. It is not that they do not care about you. It is not that if they were really confronted with 
it, they would not realize, "Oh, yes, I did not realize that I did that to you." 

These are often people that have psychic crashes. They end up sitting at a therapist's desk because they 
suddenly realize that they have crushed a lot of people and they did not even know that was happening. 
Poor things, it is not their fault. Imagine trying to cure somebody of that. It is not their fault. They are 
there to bite off the hand that feeds them. To those people that do not understand that they happen to be in 
their experience and that that is what brings them good fortune: tough. 

Remember that the nature of a line is not something that we have to heal. I always get this negative 
reaction that people have to certain lines, but it is not about fixing these things. It is not being a moralist 
saying, "Boo to biting off the hand that feeds you. This is disgusting." This is not the way it works. They 
are simply externalizing their experience at the expense of their social skills. What to do? That is who 
they are. 

In the white book: The good luck which comes from being determined that eventually, in the right place 
at the right time, leads to recognition; or The determination in success to ignore those who helped create 
it. By the way: this is not motivedriven ignoring. It is not like, "I am going to ignore them because they 
helped me." The only time that it can be like that is when they are told by somebody; then they are like 
that. 

46.5 Pacing 

We have an exalted fourth line and a detrimental fifth line. Fifth lines are normally the exalted lines. This 
is probably, of all the 64 hexagrams, the weakest of all fifth lines because of its social and abstract nature, 
and because we are dealing with pure projection. In terms of the projection: this is what society is looking 
at. What society wants to see is that there is a pacing and that everything has its kind of process so that 
success can be worked out. Everybody projects on the 46.5 that they are the ones that can always be 

successful. Remember that the 29.5 is about failure and the detriment in the 29.5 is about guaranteed 
failure. So here, when you are dealing with the 46.5 you are dealing with the consequences of what 
happens to projection on this abstract gate. What happens is in its language. 

The Moon exalted. The maintenance of proper rhythm... (Rhythm does not belong here. Rhythm is the 
15th gate.) ...that in its instinctive practicality... (Instinct does not belong here but in the tribal circuitry.) 
...avoids radical divergence from successful patterns. (With patterns we go back into the logic again.) The 
abstract process is intended to be existential. It is not intended to stay with things. This is not what it is 
about. It is an existential process in the experience. The cycle of the experience can be 10 minutes or 25 
years, but the abstract being is here to go through an experience, to reflect upon it and go on to another 
experience. 

If you are an abstract person and you are working as a salesperson, if you see a different client all the 
time, that is healthy. You go through the process, the experience. It is existential and you get to reflect on 
it later. "That person was nasty. He/she was a bad customer," or "This product sells; the other one 
doesn't." In other words, you get the whole picture from that. The moment that you deal with servicing 
that customer and you see that customer day after day, it will all fall apart because that is not an abstract 
process. You can have the experience for a while to see what it is like to service people, but you are not 
going to stay with that. 

But here, in the fifth line, it is projected on these people that there should be stability in this. So what 
happens is that people come along and project onto the 46.5 that they are going to be a success in 
whatever they are doing, and these people get stuck in that. They get conditioned by the outside to get 
stuck in a certain experience and what brought them early success ends up failing. 

The 46.5 is walking along the beach and they look down and see some money on the ground. They pick it 
up and put it in their pocket. They are very pleased and continue their walk. Then they sit in a cafe with a 
friend who tells the 46.5, "You are the kind of person. You are always so lucky. You can make a living 
just walking up and down the beach, picking up money." Off they go and they find some money, this day 
and that day. Each time they find something, it gives them a little confidence to stay with it, and they will 
find more until they quit because this is what happens to them. Their possibility for success in the 
moment gets recognized by somebody else, projected on them and then they get stuck in that pattern. The 
maintenance of proper rhythm that in its instinctive practicality avoids radical divergence from successful 
patterns. 

Neptune in detriment. An irrational... (That is the knowing circuit.) ...rejection of the very patterns that 
have proven successful. So, to understand that is to also understand that, to everybody else, it is irrational. 
It is projected on them. "How can you stop walking up and down the beach picking up coins? You are so 
lucky, you will always find something. You are crazy to give that up." 46.5's are driven crazy by other 
people. If you have a 46.5 client, tell them to learn about people and to understand that when people 
project on them they are a success, they want something of it. They want to share in it. The 46.5 ends up 
with commitments that are devastating for them. The most devastating commitment for an abstract being 
is a commitment that says, "I am going to stay with the pattern." 

In the white book: The determination to stay with the rhythm which brings success; or Determined to say 
no to the very rhythm that brings success. By the way, that saying no to the rhythm (i.e. the "cycle") is 
after being projected into it and then discovering that while you stay in it, it does not work and then you 
say no to it and you get out of it. Very difficult position. 

The whole thing for the 46 who does not have the whole channel and is looking at the 29: it is who you do 
the experience with. Everybody thinks that commitment is about the thing. For the abstract person, it is 

not the thing but who you do the thing with, because it is collective. So, you cannot avoid going through 
those experiences where you get into things through other people's projections, to see what it is like and 
then to say no to them when they then get upset. "Why are you saying no? If you stay with this, this is 
going to be that." You just have to accept that that is a pattern for you. 

46.6 Integrity 

If you look for a place of real wisdom in the abstract process, that's when you come to the 46.6. We know 
how sixth lines rise above any given situation and that when they are young, they get involved in what 
their line is all about and they learn very quickly that that does not work very well. This line is called 
Integrity and it is a Saturn/Neptune combination. 

Saturn exalted. The wisdom to secure one's identity through careful consideration of the restrictive 
potential of commitments. Neptune in detriment. Deceiving oneself and others by over-extending one's 
resources and eventually being in the position of having to break promises. The 46.6, like the whole 46th 
gate, has the quality within them that if they do accept the experience that they are in, there is going to be 
reward. 

The other thing is that they have to be in the experience. The 46.6 learns very quickly that it is not the 
experience at all that is the thing because it gets to see the whole circuit. It gets to see that the whole 
circuit is based on the impersonal contact between humans. They realize that the abstract process is faulty 
in the sense that the experience itself takes one away from the real wisdom that is possible, because it is 
the people. Like in collective sexuality in the 35/36, 41 /30, what you have is experience and excitement 
that has nothing to do with the actual person. The one thing the 46.6 knows is that success is absolutely 
dependent on the other person, and that the experience is just a catalyst, but it is the other person or the 
collective sharing that can result in real success. 

The 46.6 is not limited to just looking at this drive in the sacral center to say 'yes' to life, to experience, to 
commitments. It goes beyond that. It looks into the whole circuitry. It sees the obsession. It sees the crisis. 
It sees the progress. It sees the possibilities that are there. It sees that experience can make a contribution 
to the direction of humanity. 

Remember, the direction of humanity is towards beauty, aesthetics and harmony. That is our direction. 
The reality is that only an experience whose net value is to show the beauty and the harmony possible in 
human direction, only then is that experience worth having. That is quite a criterion. You can sit up there 
on the fence for a long time to wait and see, to find that experience that, being in it, ultimately, is of value 
to humanity. 

In the white book: The determination to say no to restrictive commitments; or A drive for success that 
will not say no and will end up breaking promises. But all of this happens when they're young. This is not 
something that is necessarily part of their mature life, unless you have people who are very Mars-oriented. 
The 46.6 goes to the 18.1. It goes to work on What has been spoilt. It goes to the need to correct within a 
collective process. A need to find what is worth challenging, and what is challenging. What is worth 
correcting? What is of value to humanity? The 46.6 is not likely to be an obvious success in this life 
because, for them, it will be dependent on how clear they are about the nature of the beings around them. 
Their success is dependent on that and, like all good sixth lines, as they sit up there on the roof of the 
house, they are checking out all the possibilities. They are looking at those different people, trying to see 
who, in fact, can help make success possible. 

It is a very difficult position and yet, it is one that carries within it a deep inherent wisdom. That is the real 
integrity. Real integrity is that you can have any kind of experience as long as that is an experience that 

you can fully put yourself into and realize that it is of substance, that it can be of value in terms of being 
able to bring something out of that back into the collective. We have two kinds of teachers: the 46.6 is the 
teacher of experience, and those teachers of experience really benefit us. They save us time, they smooth 
our way and provide us with all kinds of opportunities. That is the possibility that lies within this integrity 
of the sixth line. The 18.1 is the adherence to conservative patterns. What to challenge, this is the 
dilemma here. 

HEXAGRAM 47 OPPRESSION 

The channel 64/47, the channel of Abstraction, the channel of mental activity mixed with clarity. The 
47th gate is the gate of Oppression, the gate of realization. Its potential is the awareness to recognize what 
makes sense or not. When you are dealing with the abstract mind, the inspiration that it receives out of the 
64th gate is memory. It stores visual memory that comes back in sequences. What it is like is: you have a 
camera working in your brain all day which takes pictures of the world as the world goes by you. Every 
single inch of footage of that camera goes in and all of it gets stored in what we call the deep gray areas of 
the brain. Everything that you are taking in gets stored, but access is another story. The 64th gate is the 
abstract inspiration and, as such, it releases its sequences and not the complete footage. 

In other words, you do not get the complete beginning, middle and end. You get a sequence within that 
framework. That is why the 64th gate is a gate of Confusion. 

The first thing to recognize about Oppression is the awareness to recognize what makes sense or not, to 
recognize whether you can make sense out of that sequence. Where does it belong? Do I know what this 
is? So, this is the potential. The awareness potential is the identification of a single image, the freeze 
frame, to be able to go in and to be able to identify what the sequence is. This is the whole thing that is so 
important about the 47. That is, it needs to be able to say, "Aha, now what I am remembering, what I am 
seeing makes sense to me." 

In the Rave I'Ching, there is no more difficult a statement than the heading above the lines. It says: A 
restrictive and adverse state as a result of internal weakness or external strength, or both. The whole thing 
about the 47th hexagram is that it is oppressive. There is the inability to prove anything. There is no 
splenic system involved in the abstract process. Just simply getting a sequence out of order is, by its very 
nature, difficult on the psyche. It is there. It has to be dealt with and all one can do, in essence, is guess. 
You are realizing. You are trying to make sense out of something. What happens in a situation like that is 
what is collected from the past. You either see that in that movie the problem way is yours, or theirs. 

This all goes back to the nature of the emotional system that generates guilt, blame and shame. Making 
sense out of things is actually about who gets the blame? Does the day or the situation get the blame? Is it 
me or them? What you are trying to realize is who to blame. That's what it is on the personal level. It is 
also many other things. But the reality is that it is uncomfortable because, even when you get to the point 
that you can make sense out of it, that does not say anything. It is an attempt to relieve oneself from the 
oppression. It still has to become an idea. It still has to become something that can stimulate others. It still 
has to go through a long process. 

The thing to keep in mind about all this is that it is oppression because one of the most difficult things for 
human beings to do is to make sense out of what it is to be human. After all, all of our history that has 
been generated out of the mental plane is coming from this stream because this stream is the capacity to 
be able to look at the past and try to make sense out of past experience. It has enormous value and it is 
difficult because trying to make sense out of what it is to be human is a difficult task. 

47.1 Taking Stock 

The first line is always the foundation. It is the beginning of a process and it is introspective. This is a 
classic line for that because it is called Taking stock, and that is what taking stock is all about. It is a real 
introspective process. 

Saturn exalted. The ability in times of hardship to concentrate on eradicating the negative factors that 
have led to oppression. This hexagram is always in hardship because it is trying to realize and to make 

sense, and it has always got the sequences coming. Whenever one is looking at the past through this gate, 
you are trying to figure out what went wrong, in that sense. You are always looking to see why it didn't 
work the way I wanted it to work, the way it should, could or might have worked. You get to a point 
where that kind of a mind is trying to eradicate what went wrong in order to come up with an idea of what 
could be right. This is the nature of this kind of a mind. 

In the detriment: The delusion of seeing oppression as an exclusively external phenomenon with often 
disastrous results. In other words, I have to make sense out of this stuff, not because of me but because of 
what they did. "If it wasn't for them creating all these problems, I wouldn't have to think about that all the 
time. It is their fault. I wish they would stop." That is the other side of this line. You have to recognize 
that this is the foundation of oppression: you are either trying to correct or fix, trying to make sense out of 
what did not work in order that you can come up with an idea of what will work, or you end up constantly 
feeling like "I will never be able to come up with an idea that will really work because it is them and not 
me and I have to be the one that suffers." 

In the white book: The realization that negative thoughts have to be eradicated. Please understand that 
that can become quite obsessive. This is constantly dealing with what happened yesterday and the day 
before, trying to clean that out and trying to work it out and make sense out of it. 

On the other side we have: The sense that the world is against you. It is all their fault. This is the 
beginning of the abstract mind. That is why it is desperate for ideas. It wants to get out of that. 

47.2 Ambition 

The projection line is about the inability to take stock, to be introspective, and it is simply the need to 
project outwards. One of the things that are so funny about this line is that its resonance, the fifth line, is 
called The Saint. This is the training ground for saints and it ends up seeming exactly the opposite. It 
tends to be quite chaotic. The nature of this projection is that the only way to escape the past it to be busy 
in the present. This is the key to understanding this second line. I always tell this second line the same 
thing: be busy. 

It is called Ambition. Saturn exalted. The ambition and drive to overcome personal oppression in order to 
achieve security, which means that these can be people that are quite disturbed. 'Disturbed' in the sense 
that they cannot make sense out of something and it really bothers them. What they do is that they get 
involved with something else to try to get away from it. But as we well know, you carry everything with 
you. So, while they are being busy, they carry that with them. It always catches up to them. They 
ultimately have to deal with it one way or another. 

Mercury in detriment. An indecisiveness in times of personal oppression, whether to apply intelligence to 
recovery or accept its weight to take advantage of other prevailing conditions that may only be temporary. 
What that is saying basically is: When I have that, my biggest problem is what do I do? I know I should 
be busy, but what should I be busy with? If I don't know what to be busy with, should I really look at this 
problem and try to realize my way out of it? If I can't do that, what should I really be busy with? This can 
be very confusing. 

In the white book: Realizing that to be busy is mentally healthy. Otherwise, these people get sick. It is 
classic. If you have a 47.2 and you are not occupied, if you do not have something to do that is of value to 
you, you will get deeper and deeper into that because you cannot look inward. Remember, this trap of the 
second line. In other words, they can't realize it anyway. They have to surrender to that and, of course, it 
is only the beginning of a maturing process in the hexagram. They are not ready until the fifth line, its 
resonance, to really be able to surrender to their oppression. The second line just simply projects 

outwards. One of the most important things for these people is quality busy-ness, and the best thing, 
because of its Saturnian nature, is to make money. This is very good for 47.2s. 

47.3 Self-Oppression 

Remember that the abstract process is connected very strongly to the emotional wave. If you look at the 
third line emotional wave, you have the wave of bonds made and broken. The third line is a line of 
adaptation and, as such, it is the first opportunity in which, within the hexagram, there is this possibility 
of looking across to the other side. It is called Self-Oppression. 

Jupiter exalted. The conscious and well integrated being whose natural right action will eventually come 
to see the unfoundedness of its oppression. All that is saying is that all this stuff I keep remembering, I 
keep remembering and there is nothing I can do about it, but basically today I am okay. That is the highest 
level of this line. It is this 'okay part' that is so important in this. 

The Martian side is: A self-oppression so highly energized that it may prove irreversible and destructive. 
Going back into that mental process, you cannot make any sense out of those mental pictures. That is the 
self-oppression. You cannot make any sense out of them at all and you cannot say, in that sense, that 
today it is okay. 

In the white book: The eventual realization that one is really o.k. Everything about the abstract process is 
rooted in ultimate crisis: death and rebirth. This is the beginning, the middle and the end of things. 
Ultimately, you come to a point where you go through the field of crisis and you can come out with the 
third line and be able to say, "Yes, my mind gives me a hard time but I am okay." 

Whenever I work with people that have the 47.3, 1 tell them something very straight forward, "Your mind 
is your enemy. It does not have to ruin your life." It is the enemy for them because it is always going to be 
oppressed. For them it feels like, "Oh, my lifel This does not work. That did not work." The possibility for 
them is to realize that that is simply their mind. That is not what they are living day to day, moment by 
moment. It is simply an aspect in the way in which their mind operates. That is easier said than done. But 
the fact of the matter is that, particularly for the people that have the 47.3 activated in an undefined ajna, 
it is much easier to discover that life really is okay and that oppression is just the way their mind works. 
The other thing to recognize about this is that this is an experiential path and, as such, if we don't have the 
47.3's we don't have the best counselors available for what self -oppression truly is. 

This is the whole thing about so many lines that appear to be difficult. Without those human beings that 
can transcend the difficulty of that nature, we would not have people who would be able to guide us. 
After all, the talent of the abstract way is through experience. "I went through all these years of being self- 
oppressed. Let me tell you how this works. It does not have to ruin your life. I have had the experience. 
Let me explain it to you," says the 47.3 who has gone through that.. Remember, they are historians. Every 
single aspect of this hexagram is difficult because life is difficult, and it is extraordinary difficult to make 
sense out of life. That is why we need logic. That is why logic is healthy. So, it is an ordeal for these 
people and yet at the same time, they are the ones that can guide us through what that ordeal is. 

In the experiential way, that is the most important information you get. You get a map from somebody 
else who says, "You know, I have been there; let me tell you about it so that we can share this together." 
One of the important things to recognize is that the experience that is built into this is not by its very 
nature negative. That is not a moral question. It is of enormous advantage to us. If you are doing a reading 
for somebody who has the 47.3, the only thing that you can point to is: What in their chart can they really 
rely on to see that that is their life? For the people that have that as their only definition, the 64/47.3, this 

is a very difficult life. For them, it is very difficult to see that their life is okay. They can only learn to see 
that certain conditioning is okay. 

47.4 Repression 

With the fourth line, you get to the upper trigram and you get to externalization and to the one-track- 
process. Think about that in terms of the emotional wave of kindness/meanness; it is the Brotherhood/ 
Sisterhood. If you look at the fourth line of the 30th hexagram, it is called Burnout. That is one of the 
things to recognize about the nature of this fourth line. The fourth line is very much aware that there is 
another side. I use the word hope for the inspiration of the other side. It is all part of a belief system. It is 
hoping that what is one the other side can relieve it of its oppression. Instead, it ends up seeing that, not 
only can the other side not do that, but it is the other side that is repressing them. 

The constraints of external oppression. Saturn exalted. The strength of identity that even in times of the 
most powerful oppression can maintain its resources and to some extent ensure survival for the benefit of 
others. These people have a very fixed thing that they cannot make sense out of. They may be able to 
make sense out of all kind of things but there is one thing (the fixed nature of the fourth line) they cannot 
make sense of, and that is the thing that disturbs them the most. That is the thing they are always trying to 
get resolved and they can't. It is always something from the outside and they are hoping that the outside 
somehow resolves it. Looking, trying to externalize for that experience. 

The other side, the Moon in detriment. When robbed of its light, the Moon is lost in darkness, barely able 
to nourish itself, let alone others. These people can be very dependent and, the moment they get 
overwhelmed by that external repression, they can become so dependent that they can become psychically 
so weak, they burn out. When you have one thing and you cannot resolve that one thing, the rest of you is 
not healthy. It just keeps burning and burning. 

A sense of identity that can be maintained despite external conditioning. These people always get it. It is 
not that they are making this up. They are not crazy. If you are born with a 47.4, you have to deal with all 
kinds of forces on the outside, like everybody else, except the 47.4 takes it personal. We all have to deal 
with external repression, oppression, all of us, but we have a different way of dealing with that. Each in 
our own particular styles. These people are always fixed on that. 

The identity overwhelmed by external conditioning. They are so dependent on the other that they 
collapse. These are, for example, people that got something in their head that they want somebody to fix 
for them (their therapist, the doctor, their guru). Everybody is trying to condition them away from that, 
trying to solve it for them and it does not work. They really go mad. They can really burn out. The best 
therapist for them is the 36.4 because it brings them the correct crisis. 

47.5 The Saint 

When we come to the fifth and sixth lines, we notice that they are both singularities. These are two out of 
the nine lines throughout the 384 that are singularities. The fifth line is The Saint, this resonance from the 
projection out of Ambition, this being busy. The second line is being busy to escape and the Saint is being 
busy but not as an escape. There just is nothing else to do. Why get involved with all of that oppression 
which is just going to catch you up in the whole mental trip? Why not simply just go out there and live 
your life? This is the nature of the fifth line. This position has special significance and there is no planet 
in detriment. 

Venus exalted. The gift in times of oppression to maintain, without hypocrisy, a harmonic relationship 
with one's oppressors, while providing aid and succor to the oppressed. These people are just fine; that is, 
it is going on in there and if you talk to them they'll say, "Yes, I know. But it is just my mind." 

In the white book: Realization at its most exalted. Acceptance of the weight of the abstract process and 
the grace that naturally follows. The abstract process is a painful process. It is its nature. The wave is from 
hope to pain. It is its nature. It is difficult. It is full of illusion. It is full of change and transitoriness. It 
always has its crisis. It is always going to be something that is uncomfortable, particularly at the mental 
level. The nature of the fifth line is that it is the universalization line: to show that, yes, oppression is there 
but this is not a bad thing. This is a process of remembering and trying to make sense out of what it is to 
be human. It ends up that people who carry this line can be very saintly. They can care very much for the 
pain of other humans and they can deal with that, and they can offer themselves in that because they do 
know it so well. 

47.6 Futility 

The ajna center, like the splenic center and like any awareness center, is a center of fear. In the mind, we 
call it anxiety. The fear of the 47th gate is the fear of not being able to realize, the fear of not being able to 
make sense out of life, the fear of not being able to relieve oneself of the oppression. When you come to 
the sixth line, all sixth lines carry with them the potential for depression. You are getting to the top of the 
house. You are on the roof and you looking out beyond, and what your hexagram represents is not what 
you are looking for. The 47.6, the next line is the 6.1, directly into the wave of the 6.1, directly into the 
line of not wasting your resources. This is a line of Futility. It is futile and it can be the most deeply 
depressive of all lines. Because it is on the mental plane, it can involve deep anxiety. 

Futility. A difficult position, for which there is no exaltation. The Sun in detriment, where the strength of 
will alone may find a way to adapt and survive, but without hope of ever overcoming the oppression. 
Here in the white book: Life as an ordeal stripped of realization. That means, from the mental plane and 
perspective, for these people, it is truly futile. Why bother to make sense out of that? What is the truth? 
The depression that lies in this sixth line, at this place, what it really wants is the truth. It does not just 
want something that makes sense because it knows that that does not work. It is futile. Something that 
makes sense today makes different sense tomorrow or no sense at all, and the sixth line knows that 
because it knows that it is just a wave. What it is really looking for is something beyond that. It is looking 
for the truth. What is the truth? What is it to be human? 

The truth comes in the next line: Don't waste your resources on relationships that are not of value to you. 
That is its truth. Do not be open to things that are not of value to you. It is looking for its truth. These 
people know exactly that there is no use complaining. They realize that complaints are futile. They are 
very sensitive when they have other people around that constantly complain. They do not like that and, 
therefore, it is very important for them not to waste their resources on the wrong relationships. 

HEXAGRAM 48 THE WELL 

We are in a collective process. The 48th hexagram is part of the channel of talent, the channel of The 
Wave Length. It is part of the logical process of correction and perfection and, as I mentioned when we 
were looking at the 57th gate and the 18th gate, the 48th gate is a gate of frustration. Its possibility is to 
have depth, but depth without expression, without the possibility to experiment, leads to deep frustration. 
This frustration is known creatively by anybody who is involved in any kind of creative process: the 
inability to be able to experiment, the inability to be able to see whether or not your depth can lead to a 
solution. 

The 48th gate is the gate of black magic: black magic in the sense that it is knowledge without necessarily 
being able to manifest. The 48th gate is The Well. It is the darkest place you will find in a chart. It is filled 
with all this deep, dark mystery. "I know how to turn straw into gold, if you only give me enough money 
to build the machinery." The 48 says, "I have got it," and looks to the 16 and asks, "Can I experiment with 
this? Will you finance this?" The machine, by the way, which will turn straw into gold would cost much 
more than the finished product, but that is another story. 

In the 48, in the gate of depth, there is always the frustration. "Is there a possibility? Can I actually get to 
the Throat? Can I actually manifest? Can I see that this experiment will lead to a solution?" Remember 
that frustration is one of the deepest aspects of our collective logical process. It is hard for the logic to 
find a motor. The three gates of logic in the Throat do not lead directly to an energy. What that means is 
that we have committees and bureaucracies. We have all kinds of recommendations that are made over 
and over again, and the deep frustration that lies within the collective: why can't they just do it instead of 
talking about it? This frustration is part of our whole logical process. So, all that is rooted in the 48. 

That frustration is, by its very nature, necessary because it is so difficult to get to the energy that logic 
needs. The frustration is in and of itself a driving force. There is this constant tension (the 48 is part of the 
cross of Tension) which is necessary because it has to hold on to that "I have got the depth. I have got to 
get it out." It is collective and not personal. There is this deep frustration in needing to share that depth. 

The 48th gate, The Well, the gate of depth: the possibility here is the awareness resource of vital 
information as a pattern or not. What is vital is determined by the 18th gate which has the gift to 
recognize what needs to be corrected or perfected. This is what is vital. What often happens with the 48th 
gate is that (every line can be its polarity) that vitality becomes trivia. There is an enormous amount of 
trivia that lies in depth. I have what people call a photographic memory, so not only do I remember things 
that seem to be of value to you, but I remember the most absurd and useless information that you could 
possibly imagine, i.e. theme songs of commercials on the radio from 25 years ago. Things that people 
think that nobody should remember, I remember. The Well is filled with many things. The Well is not just 
filled with what we think is valuable and essential truth. The Well is also filled with a lot of junk. This is 
the whole thing about talent. Talent can be wonderful, and very kitschy. The awareness possibility in the 
48: correction stored as a pattern. The whole thing about depth is, "We know this is what has to be 
corrected. This is the pattern that has to be worked with. Now we will go deep into that and see exactly 
how we can do that, and then we pray that we meet a 16 so that we can get it out, so that we can get our 
experiment done. It is very difficult for logic to actually be experimented with. 

Please understand the nature of the expression because most people do not understand what 'white' and 
'black magic' means. The nature of the 48th gate is to come to grips with what is exactly the right pattern, 
and to understand the form. To understand the form is to understand the pattern. Black magic is 
understanding the pattern and using that as an advantage over others. That is simply the manipulation of 
the understanding of something. This is what they call 'black magic' and in many cases the 48's are aware 
of patterns that others are not aware of. Because they have to look for the possibility of expression, they 

take advantage of the patterns that they know. I consider astrologers to be black magicians, given this 
expression. When an astrologer does a reading, he holds the chart and you are the ignorant one. They will 
tell you exactly what is there because they have the power and you don't. This is the work of black magic. 
There is no way for you to confirm that. There is no way for you to do anything other than to accept that 
they know and you don't. 

The nature of Human Design is not that. Human Design is not black magic. It is a knowledge of form and 
a knowledge of form is available to anyone. So when a Human Design analyst puts a chart down on the 
table, you can understand exactly what they are pointing at so that you can see what is there. There is a 
fundamental difference between these forms. By the way, that is not to say that I think that black magic is 
about good or bad. It is just about understanding the nature of the terminology. In the 48, you are dealing 
with a pattern. This is the channel of talent for the collective, the depth of which can be of enormous 
value to the collective. 

When we were looking at the 18th gate, the heading to it says: The vigilance and the determination to 
uphold and defend basic and fundamental human rights. Let us not forget that that is what the 18th gate is 
about: to uphold basic and fundamental human rights and to correct anything that denies those rights. 
When you get to the 48th hexagram, it says: The necessary and qualitative foundation that is a 
prerequisite to establish the common good. Without depth, without the recognition and the understanding 
about the nature of the form, without being able to understand the pattern, common good cannot be 
established. Though this can be a gate of black magic in that sense, please understand that the nature of 
this depth is there for the common good. It is not about telling somebody that you know what is good for 
them. It is about allowing them to experiment with it and find out for themselves. That is another story. 

48.1 Insignificance 

The line of introspection. The foundation is called Insignificance. One of the things to understand about 
depth is that it takes time. Each of these lines requires a different kind of spacing in the life because they 
can actually reach the point in which the Well is rich with what is inside of it. 

Moon exalted. An instinctive recognition of what is practical and deserves attention. This is part of the 
foundation of what depth is about. On one side, depth always represents the possibility of something that 
is practical and deserves attention. When I have people who come with the first line, I always remind 
them, "Yes, you are going to be able to have an understanding of many things, but the only things that 
you will get to experiment with are those things that are practical and really are deserving of somebody 
else's attention." 

The Martian side is: An ego tendency to apply energy to trivial considerations. This is what I said to you 
about the basic dichotomy that exists within the nature of The Well. The Well has these two sides. It has 
the capacity to recognize and understand patterns that are of benefit to humanity (this is a collective 
process) and, on the other side, it has the recognition of the patterns and all the trivia that is connected to 
those patterns. 

A taste for recognizing what is practical and deserves attention; or A taste for trivia. By the way, I love 
trivia. This is not about good or bad in these things. The essential truths of my life are in the trivia. This is 
what I have discovered. I am an eclectic and therefore I collect everything. What I discovered about the 
garbage is that what I was collecting I assumed to be flowers and that when I looked to the flowers and I 
dug into the earth, I recognized that their root is all that stuff I considered to be garbage. All of that trivia: 
like cliches. I love cliches. I hated them when I was intellectual and ignorant. I thought that they were 
terrible, but now I realize that they are the funniest things we have and that they are essentially true. The 

little things, the trivial things, are not about not respecting them. You simply have to recognize that depth 
is something that is not just about what is important. It is also about what is simply there. 

The collective field: to recognize and be aware of the collective environment is the foundation of depth. 
Depth is not limited to a prejudice that says, "I can only be deep because it is a value". This is not the 
mind. This has nothing to do with the way we think. This is the depth that is coming into us all the time 
and we are not necessarily consciously involved with this process at all. It is simply there and suddenly it 
blurts out of our mouth, and we hear that we have collected these patterns. They are suddenly just 
emerging. So, recognize that the basis of depth is not to be judgmental from the mental perspective about 
what your depth is made up of. Fear of inadequacy is the fear here and so often when people come to me 
with the 48th gate (I have both my Neptunes here, so I know it deeply), I say to them, "Relax, you are 
deep. You cannot judge your depth from your mind." That is what Neptune taught me. I was never 
allowed to see it. It is a depth that takes place at a lymphatic level. It has nothing to do with the way we 
think. It collects everything. It collects, in each person that carries that gate, exactly the depth that you 
need. This is the beauty of it. 

48.2 Degeneracy 

This line is called Degeneracy. If you look at the 18.2, it is called Terminal disease, which meant that no 
correction can take place. There is nothing that can be corrected. This is a very important lesson for the 
48.2. This is a projection field. It cannot look inside, so it is not looking at its depth. It just wants to have 
its chance to experiment on the other side. Due to that wish and due to the fact that it does not know the 
other side, it is just projecting outwards and fails to recognize something intrinsic: it does not matter how 
much depth you have, the experimenter controls it. Remember that. This is very important. No matter 
how much depth you have, it is the 16th gate that is in control of manifestation, of expression, and it is the 
16th gate that says, "I will experiment with this, or not". 

The awareness that to successfully establish a new form one cannot neglect the most positive attributes 
just to accommodate inferior elements. This would lead to deterioration. The other side: The misguided 
urge for harmony that when associated with inferior values degenerates into decadence. 

You are a 48 and you are working as a graphic artist for an advertising agency, and you have a very 
important client for your company. The client wants you to design a soap box for them. You go about 
your job and you design a soap box with your 48 depth and talent. You know what pattern will work. You 
know what kind of pattern the collective is really going to appreciate and you design the box. You color it 
and put all your letters on. This is classic for the 48.2. Then the client comes and says, "The box has the 
right shape but I do not like the color. I don't like what you have written. I don't like the letter type that 
you used. I don't like where you have put it. I want you to change all these points and experiment with 
blue instead of red and with this kind of type." The 48.2 in the detriment can always say yes to that, based 
on the rooting of the 18.2. "It is not good enough, I am inadequate. I cannot really challenge the authority 
because I cannot correct them. I will give up my artistic integrity and I will allow them to degenerate my 
creative skills. What my intuition brought out for that box was correct, whether they like it or not. " 

But in the 48, there is this deep fear of inadequacy. That fear out of the projection line can immediately 
lead to the talent being broken. I met so many of these people and they all suffer from this until they 
finally realize that, unless they stand by their intuition and allow it to be correct for them, they will soon 
discover that there are people who will resonate to that. They should only work with those people. 

A confidence in awareness to resist inferior influences. It is all about confidence. You either have 
confidence in your taste, or you don't. 

A lack of confidence that invites interference and decadence. You can only have confidence when you 
know the mechanics. If you have a defined splenic system and the 48th gate, you have to recognize that 
you must rely on that. It is you. It does not mean that it will be right for everyone. It means that it will 
always be right for you. The confidence comes in accepting that that is correct for you, as long as you 
recognize that there is the opportunity, the possibility, to stand by your intuition. 

All projected fields generate interference from others. Every second line is looking for somebody who is 
going to smack it because second lines are always the projections that lack depth, so they end up banging 
into something. But it does not mean that they are inferior in quality. I know wonderful 48.2 artists who 
went through hell during the early part of their career because they had people telling them what they 
should paint. "Don't paint in oil, paint in water colors. Those brushes are too big. Use smaller ones." They 
did what they were told. When they had their reading done, they all understood the mechanics, and this 
whole burden disappeared. They were relieved of the whole load. Confidence can only grow out of the 
recognition of the mechanics. If you have it, you have to learn to rely on it. That is what our work is 
about. Trust what is you. 

48.3 Incommunicado 

When you come to the third line and the fourth line, you come to the themes of individuality. The theme 
about individual depth is the most difficult of all the lines in the 48. Both of these lines are indications of 
long term processes. I have both my Neptunes in the third and the fourth line. When you get to your half- 
life point, to your mid-life, that is when you begin to get a benefit from the depth that can be developed 
here. Both Incommunicado and Restructuring are, by their very nature, long term processes, and this 
means that the depth is not there for a very long time. The Well really has to fill up. The third line is 
called Incommunicado. This line speaks for itself. It is a line of adaptation; this is the end of the lower 
trigram process. 

The Moon exalted. Symbolized by the 'no-moon' phase where the potential of light is unrecognized, 
unavailable and unknowable. The redeeming value is in the transience of such a stage which can give 
strength to those so afflicted. Mercury in detriment. The profound anxiety when a profound intelligence is 
forgotten in the wilderness. 

The depth is there but it takes many years for it to flower. The process is such that anybody who has that 
line knows that there is depth within them. There is this urge to bring it out. It is very difficult for people, 
like myself, who are very individual. These two lines that I have my Neptunes in, the only way that they 
get to the throat is via the 57/20, so my depth is always coming out through this manifestation to my 
throat, yet I had to go through a lifetime process of not knowing what the hell I was here for, having no 
idea and not getting out any of what I thought was the depth within me. This is a long term process. 

Where the development of taste and depth is a long-term process; and on the other side: The tendency in a 
long-term process to anxiety. This can be deeply frustrating. It is one of the most frustrating lines because 
it is the capacity to be totally ignored for your depth. Many people can be psychically damaged by this. 
These are the people that become obsessed with skills. They think, "If I have the right skill I can get my 
depth out," and are constantly looking for another skill. 

48.4 Restructuring 

The fourth line people are the most gifted. They are very talented people but most of them never get to 
live out their talent in their life because this is a deeply frustrating line, much more frustrating than the 
Incommunicado, because the Incommunicado does come to an end and one gets used to the fact that one's 

depth does not seem to come out. You get a delightful sweet surprise when it finally does. The reality is 
that when you are dealing with the fourth line, (remember that it is about externalization), it is the 
recognition that one has to make on the other side and it is a very fixed process, a one-track-process. 

Here, in the Restructuring you have: The good sense to take advantage of the restriction on short-term 
activity to assess the situation and restructure for long-term goals that will facilitate development when 
activity resumes. On other side: A resistance to restructuring on speculation with the tendency, when 
activity resumes, to have to do so anyway. 

Please understand how this works. Let's say that you are a writer having this line. You have the depth, and 
all of a sudden there is a transit and the 16 comes along and you start to write. The depth is coming out 
and it feels wonderful and then it suddenly stops. It might stop after an hour, or after four days. It depends 
on the transit and on what is going on in your process. But the fact is that this is the line of stopping and 
starting. These people can go absolutely nuts because they think (like the 18.4) that they are incompetent. 
So, they start writing something and it stops and they burn it, they throw it away. They forget about it 
because they say, "I could not do it. I could not fulfill that. I could not keep on doing it." This is a lie. 

The nature of this line is that it takes a long time for these individual theme -lines to mature into their 
creative depth. What that means it that processes start and stop. They stop for a reason. They stop so that 
new depth can be added before you can return. This used to drive me crazy. I start writing something. I 
am on automatic -pilot. I am what I call a bio-faxmachine: it is there and it is great and then it stopped. I 
got really angry. Why did it stop? I was ignorant and thought that it was my talent and my depth. "This 
hand and this pen will do what I say," but this does not work. This can be very frustrating. Only when I 
was aware of this knowledge, only then, for the first time in my life could I do that. I have been working 
on a book for over four years now and I work on it when I can. I have never done that in my whole life. 
When I did the white book, I sat still for two and a half months and worked 14 hours a day. That is my 
style. But there is a part in me that has to work on things in this fourth-line way and I learned from that 
knowledge to trust it: to see that I can go back. Before, I never thought that I could go back, that it would 
still be there waiting for me to go back to and that it would continue. 

This is so important for the people with the fourth line. They have to see that whatever comes out is 
correct for its time, for its moment, and it is not to be destroyed. One has not to be frustrated that one 
cannot continue. I always tell these people about respecting and honoring the muse, who is not always 
there. 

The awareness that depth and its possible expression will face restrictions with a resulting taste for short- 
term projects. Learn to accept what you get existentially, creatively. Whatever you get, it is okay. When it 
stops, it is time to refill the well. 

A taste for long-term projects that will be frustrated in restraint. "I want to write a book starting at page 1 
and I want to get to the last page and I don't want anything to get in the way of that." Of course, it always 
does and then you end up with this deep frustration. Whenever you see people with the third and fourth 
line, understand that they have their roots in the 18.3 and the 18.4. This is the root for the deep frustration. 
"I want to correct it now and get the whole thing done." 

48.5 Action 

When you get to the fifth and sixth lines, you are in the collective themes and the 48th belongs to a 
collective circuit. We know that fifth lines have a special quality; they are the penultimate of a hexagram, 
they bring together all of the basic qualities of the hexagram and have the capacity within them to 

universalize them. The fifth lines that are in a collective circuitry have a deep resonance to that circuitry, 
and universalization is something that can be powerfully moved through those fifth lines. 

Here, it is called Action. A natural urge to apply energy to action. In other words, "I have got it. Let's do 
it. I have the pattern, the depth. Let's do it. " These people are interested in getting the pattern out, getting 
the corrective process out, getting the experiment done. Remember that the fifth line, in terms of its 
emotional wave, has to do with seduction. All fifth lines are deeply seductive. Let me seduce you to do an 
experiment with my wonderful depth. 

On the other side of that, the Moon in detriment. An over-reliance on the need for protection that in times 
of social renewal is obsessed with the details of planning at the expense of action. On one side of the 18.5, 
you have The Therapist and on the other side you have The Mental patient. They belong to each other in 
the same bag which gets carried over to this fifth line. So, the natural urge to apply energy into action. "I 
know how everybody can be made to feel better. Let's do it." The collective answer. On the other side is 
the fear that the experiment won't work. It is safer to keep on working out the details of it. "Yes, well, I 
really think that I have an answer, but I am still doing my research. I am not ready to experiment with it. I 
am not ready to tell you what it is." 

A taste for action; or Insecurity with one's depth that can fail to take action. "I am not ready." Endless 
planning and detail-working and, in its own way, this is the instability of The Mental patient that we have 
in the detriment of the 18.5. It is so difficult to get logic into action that, the moment that the opportunity 
is there, you have to be ready and the people in the detriment are not always ready. They are afraid of the 
authority that they have challenged. They are afraid of their depth not being adequate enough and they are 
afraid of failing, of having everybody say, "Look, you were wrong all along and you have wasted your 
time." Rather than getting to the point of experimenting, they don't let anybody know what their depth 
really is. These are people that keep diaries that nobody ever sees, with all their theories about the nature 
of living. Later, you find out that they were totally different than what you thought. 

48.6 Self-fulfillment 

The sixth line, the roof of the house. The line of transition is called Self-fulfillment. An undiminishable 
resource. Venus exalted. The valued center that as it gives, it receives and thus can continue to give. 
When it gives, it receives. Remember that this is a sixth line. The 18.6 is not Work on what has been 
spoilt, it is spoilt. This is the little Buddha that everybody has to nurture. This is the one that has be 
looked after and treated well. 

On the other side of this Self-fulfillment, the depth is there, regardless. They are not inadequate. These are 
people with depth and understanding but they do not particularly care about whether they experiment with 
it or not in order to really see for sure if they understand. Only if they give out their understanding will the 
opportunity for experimentation come back and, the moment they do that, they are of value to other 
human beings. They can be very gifted. They already can intuitively recognize what is beyond the skills 
on the other side, what the indication or direction is afterwards, when the experiment is actually proven. 
They recognize intuitively what can transpire out of that experiment. 

Moon in detriment. A tendency to superficiality that, though generous and nurturing, will lack the 
inspirational quality that can transform its gift into a common currency. In the white book: A depth and 
potential talent that is of value to others; or Where the depth is limited, the taste will be superficial and 
affect the quality of the possible talent. All depth is limited unless it can be experimented with. This is the 
ultimate limitation of all depth. The moment that you recognize something and understand it, you have to 
check it out and if you do not do so, you are not truly a logical being and you will not be able to provide 

for the love of humanity, to provide a logical pattern that is reliable for humanity to move towards the 
future. 

So, it becomes very important for the sixth lines to give their pattern to somebody else, if they themselves 
do not want to check it out. "We know that you understand, but if you can't check it out, give it to 
somebody else." There is no selfishness in this. This is self -fulfilled. If the sixth lines consider that, they 
can become enormously valuable because what they offer for experimentation can lead to something that 
is totally beyond the talent. It is where it goes to throughout the whole being. By the way, these are people 
where everybody else says that they are inadequate. This is the funny thing about this line. But they are 
not. 

HEXAGRAM 49 REVOLUTION 

This hexagram is called Revolution, and we step into the emotional system. Remember that 
every single gate out of the emotional system resonates to the nature of that wave. The channel 
19/49, the channel of Synthesis, is a design of sensitivity. This is a tribal, mystical channel. It is 
about the nature of resources in the tribe, and it is about touch. The 49 th hexagram is the gate of 
principles. This gate establishes the principles of resources: who gets what and what do they 
get. This is the nature of the 49 th gate. It establishes what has to be obeyed. The 49 th gate is 
always looking for obedience. That is its nature. It is a gate of principles and its potential is the 
awareness of what is needed or not. Please understand that this is not an awareness. What is 
needed or not, as a principle, operates in the wave. When you are at the low end of the wave, 
you do not need it so much, or maybe you do. Or at the high end of the wave, you need 
something or you don't. This is conditioned by the nature of the wave. 

All of our revolutions, all of our principles have been conditioned ignorantly by the nature of this 
wave. The awareness potential is food discrimination. This is all about dictating from the 49th 
position, and establishing the principles about what food should be available, and when the food 
should be available, and how to get the food. All of this is about organizing the resources for the 
tribe. So, the 49 th gate is an emotional gate and, as such, in its wave, it determines what kind of 
resources do go where. The access to food is not guaranteed because it is a long way to the 
throat. Revolutions are promises. Principles are often nothing more than empty bags, usually 
with money inside that has been removed. This is the gate of the sacrificer and the sacrificed. 
This is the butcher's gate. 

49.1 The Law of Necessity 

This is the foundation. This is the introspection. This is the root of all revolution. The nature of 
revolution is that it must be based on the Law of necessity. Revolution has no support unless it 
is perceived as necessary. 

Jupiter exalted. The understanding and application of this law to maximize expansion of support 
and thereby ensure viability. The awareness that the potential of a principle is based on it being 
accepted as viable. After all, this is tribal. The 49 is always looking for support and the first thing 
that it recognizes is: there is no revolution unless it has that support. The 49 will only get that 
support if what it is offering is viable. It has to be of value. It is not just a revolution for the sake 
of revolution. There must be a basic necessity at work. 

Sun in detriment. The misuse of influence, to insist that necessity can be created out of action. 
The 'Helter Skelter' syndrome. To commit acts of disorder as proof that disorder exists. This is 
the Helter Skelter syndrome which is based on Charles Manson, this madman from America. He 
decided to kill people and tried to make it look like it was black people who were doing the 
killing, in the hope that this would start a race war. If you don't have a race war and you think 
that there should be a race war, then you create it and make it look like there is one in order to 
get everybody on the band wagon. This is Helter Skelter. "Okay, it is not around. Let's do it and 
then they think that it is around and then we will get our revolution." This is practiced a lot by 
fascists or communists, by all kinds of people, in the early days of their whole process to try to 
attract people. 

The detriment in the Book of Letters: Oversensitivity to rejection that can turn a principle into a 
crusade. "You reject me. I will make sure that I will get the support and I'll show you how I get 

that support. You don't think that there is a race war going on. I will show you," and then they go 
out and kill some people to let everybody know. 

Revolution is based on the law of necessity. The purity of revolution is based on a true 
necessity. The perversion of revolution is when the necessity is created as an illusion in order to 
establish a framework for revolution to take place. These are the two sides of the foundation. 
Everything about the 49th gate is about whether principles are going to be accepted or rejected. 
That is the nature of its wave. 

49.2 The Last Resort 

When we come to the second line, we come to the line of projection. It is called The last resort. 
The nature of this: If you look above the lines in the Rave I'Ching it says: Ideally the 
transformation of forms is based on the highest principles and not simply for power. This is a 
power gate. It always has power because it is establishing the principles, which it does 
emotionally. That means that it can blind you. So many decent people were blinded by 
horrendous principles because of their emotional power. 

Here we have the Earth exalted. The determination to exhaust every possible peaceful avenue 
for change and then, when satisfied that no other course is possible, to plan in detail before 
revolution is attempted. These are the people that are always planning to reject you or planning 
to accept you, depending on where they are in the nature of their wave. 

The potential to explore every possibility before rejecting. In the moment of rejection, you have 
to understand that rejection leads to revolution and the establishment of a new principle. So, 
what happens to these people is that they are the ones who get more and more impatient. They 
keep waiting for something to come along that is going to match their principles. When they run 
out of patience, they start planning for their revolution, whatever that revolution will be. It can be 
a household revolution. It does not have to be one of these grand revolutions. But it is a 
revolution in terms of establishing a new principle. You have somebody in your life and you 
keep on saying to them, "Squeeze the toothpaste at the bottom," and that principle keeps being 
rejected by them and you keep on telling them, hoping that they will eventually do what you told 
them. If they don't, you explode and you project all of that out to them and say, "This is it. 
Finished. You are rejected." 

When we get to the other side of this, we get to Pluto in detriment. The overwhelming 
revolutionary urge that is impatient with accommodation and negotiation. The tendency here is 
the coup d'etat that has little general support. You walk in and say, "I have a new principle 
today." Everybody looks at you like you are crazy. You walk back home and say, "All right. New 
principle today: from now on, nobody is allowed to use the refrigerator after 9 o'clock p.m." If 
you don't have the support of others, you will have to back that up by putting a lock on the door 
with a timer. Otherwise you will have a problem. This is the nature of the lost resort which can 
always lead to this point where, based on the nature of the wave, either the high end where you 
feel that you can advance (second line wave) or the low end where you feel that you have to 
withdraw. But there is this point where, in the withdrawal, you are looking and seeing, "All right, I 
am waiting. They still don't follow my principle," and then the wave goes to the advance and 
then, booml In you go and establish your principle. This is the nature of the coup d'etat as well, 
except that it is much more forceful. 

There is a lot of suffering associated with this gate because this is a gate of very powerful 
rejection. If you are rejected within the tribe, you have nowhere to go. You have no shelter, no 

home, no place to live and nothing to eat. Your children will have no friends. They will not have 
an education. This gate decides whether you should even be allowed to live or not. It is 
revolution. Revolution is a bloody business because it is emotional. If you do not want an 
unnecessary revolution, make sure that everybody has enough to eat and make sure that 
everybody has a partner. That is what this is all about. It is about resources. If there is not 
enough to eat and if there Js not enough selection of partners, then you have problems. If you 
ever want to calm down a revolutionary, give them a good dinner. It immediately calms them 
down. It is very good for them, and lets them be revolutionaries in their own home. 

49.3 Popular Discontent 

When you get to the third line and you get to Popular discontent, and we have the theme of 
irresponsibility. Here we have the wave of allegiance/rejection, bonds made and broken. So you 
know what kind of revolutions these will be. They are on/off revolutions. You are part of the hip- 
hop revolution and then immediately you jump over to the bebop revolution, and then you go 
back to the hip-hop. 

Neptune exalted. The ability to destroy antiquated forms once the restrictions have been 
removed. The moment that these people are emotionally uncomfortable with the lack of a 
resource, they are ready to get on the revolutionary band wagon. They will just jump right in 
there. Remember, there is a lot of fertility in that. They can bring a lot of people along with them. 
"Why isn't there a zucchini in the shopping market anymore?" 

Pluto in detriment. With general support, a savageness in eliminating the old order that may 
permanently scar the new. 

This is rooted in the 6.3, the breaking of allegiances, and in the 59.3 which is promiscuity. It can 
be very painful for people. After all, this is tribal and requires support. You bring somebody into 
a revolution and then you totally turn your back to it and to them, after you have brought them 
in. You are the one that can be very changeable in the nature of the principle. 

In the Book of Letters, you have: The potential in sensitivity to reject failed principles or 
relationships. This 49.3 will always react that way. "This does not work. I do not want to have 
anything to do with this revolution. I do not want to have anything to do with the Marxist 
revolution because I want to have my Mercedes." 

On the other side: An insensitivity in rejection and rejecting. This is what leaves the scars. By 
the way, it can be brutal. If you get left out in a revolution, you are the one who has no access to 
the resources. So it can definitely leave scars in others. In order for revolution to be of value it 
has to be viable and it can't be simply for the power. 

49.4 Platform 

When you get to this externalization, here it is no longer a process in which the revolutionary 
potential will have its difficulties in getting out. The first three lines are always about that. It is a 
process for them to develop a recognition of the intrinsic value of their value. By the time you 
get to the fourth line, this outwards movement is already established. The fourth line as 
externalization is fixed and one-tracked. This is a one-track agenda. We have already seen this 
when we looked at the 11.4, the way in which The Teacher works, and the 17.4, the way in 
which The Personnel manager works. When you looking here at Platform, what you are looking 
at is a narrow agenda, whatever it happens to be. 

Jupiter exalted. A political and social agenda, embodied in guarantees to human rights that 
ensures a just and valued replacement of the old order. What happens to these people is that 
their concerns are legitimate, but their focus is limited. That can be of enormous value. For 
example, people whose only concern is the welfare of animals. That is their platform. They see 
somebody with a fur coat and go bananas. If they think about cattle being locked up in these 
horrible boxes and being stuffed with food and hormones, they go crazy. They have a single 
agenda which can be wonderful, or a pain in the neck. These are people that are always 
banging at you with their single platform. 

A potential sensitivity to the needs of society. Please remember: that need is not a general need 
of society. It is a very specific need. These people, when they are at home, (We are not talking 
about the world; we are talking about the tribe and the household.) they have their special 
agenda. It is very fixed, what resource they think is necessary. "I don't care if you want to have 
beds. I need a car." They are fixed on their specific agenda and it does not matter to them. They 
know that the car is of value because it will allow them to make money. They will have their own 
way of seeing why that principle is necessary. They are not very clear about what else is going 
on around them and what the other needs are. They are easily rejected. Some of them are 
considered to be nuts. 

Mars in detriment. Promises, promises, promises and only to guarantee support with little 
possibility of implementation. If you would only follow this principle that if everybody held their 
nose in the morning and drank their yarn, everybody would feel better. There are people who 
think that is great, but the reality is that to promise that to others does not necessarily mean that 
that revolution is going to be implemented. Let's hope not. 

49.5 Organization 

We come to the universalization of the revolutionary process, of this principle process. 
Organization. Moon exalted. Practical provisions for the needs of others in revolutionary times (if 
the times are not revolutionary, forget it) which ensures support and continued understanding. 

In the Book of Letters: A potential sensitivity to the practical needs of others. That is operating in 
a wave. So when you are at the low end of the wave, that potential sensitivity for the practical 
needs: you recognize it but you have no need to get involved in that because everything about 
the wave is about selflessness and selfishness. The moment that the wave is in the selfish part, 
you realize the needs and problems of society. This is my line. I know it so well. You see that 
society needs some practical provisions but, tough, I don't feel like it. I have to look after myself. 
I am selfish in that wave. For me, it was even more confusing because my wave is conditioned 
by other people due to my undefined emotional system, and it is my only theme. On the other 
side is selflessness: I have my own problems, but let me give you those principles in order that 
you can have practical provisions in revolutionary times. Understand how that operates in its 
wave. One side of that line is always operating in that wave. 

Mars in detriment. A concentration on the organization of power to clearly define authority, often 
at the expense of higher principles. This is rooted in the selflessness/selfishness wave. The 
moment that you are in charge of which resources will be distributed, if you are selfish, you will 
take advantage of that power. This can be heavy on people. After all, this is about seduction 
and sacrifice. 

In the white book: A rejection of higher principles in seeking to organize others. When that is 
selfless, that is okay. There are times when higher principles will have to be sacrificed in order 
for revolution to take place. History is full of deals that are made with the devil in order to get to 
the end that will be justified. Often higher principles are sacrificed but they could never be 
sacrificed in the selfish end of that wave because then you have power trippers. Then you have 
people that will bring about the sacrifice. This whole gate is about the images of Christ/Anti- 
Christ, the Sacrificer, the Sacrificed, the Seducer and the Seduced. It is all rooted in here and 
this is a key for the nature of revolution. 

Revolution is operating in a wave where it is selfish and selfless. It is very easy to see Marxism 
as being selfless and Communism as being selfish. The moment that you see it in practice, you 
can see how the wave operates, given the nature of what human beings are. As long as the 
emotional system is unaware, no revolution is trustworthy due to this lack of awareness. Every 
single step that we take is a step we have to logically analyze, whether it really is healthy for the 
well-being of the other. Nothing of the emotional system is fundamentally healthy. We have to 
be deeply concerned about the nature of any kind revolution, any kind of emotional principle that 
is established for us, because it is not rooted in awareness. 

Collective logic is the only thing that can guarantee human rights, not emotional principles. They 
usually cry out because people don't have enough to eat. Out of that not having enough to eat, 
not having enough territory and not having the protection of their language and their culture, out 
of that comes an enormous abuse of other human beings. What is so important about the 
emotional system, what is so important about the nature of revolution, is that you take away all 
of its power when people have enough to eat. My joke about Mc Donald's is not such a joke. 
Countries who can afford to have that kind of lifestyle on a homogenous planet don't have any 
interest in warfare. There is food being made available. The general wealth is increasing in 
terms of the average human being having enough calories in their bodies every day. 

You have 10 million children born a week hungry. Those children are going to be 
revolutionaries. If you do not feed them, they are going to kill you. Please understand that. That 
is the law of revolution. All of the heat and violence of this is eliminated when there is tribal 
integrity, which means that your language, your home, your food and your family is secure, but 
most of all, that there is enough to eat. That is the most practical of all provisions. Food. 

49.6 Attraction 

When you get to the line of transition, remember, the nature of the 6.6 was not interested in the 
intimacy but in the world the children will live in, if it was going to have children at all. The 49th 
hexagram is part of our tribal process and it establishes our sexuality and the arrangements that 
will take place in the marriage itself. It establishes what the community is like and what the 
resources of the community are going to be. It establishes the principles for that. The 49.6, if 
engaged, is quite remarkable. It is called Attraction and it can be a very attractive force. But, like 
the mystery of the One Night Stand, it may not get involved in any principle at all because it is 
deeply concerned about what the revolution will bring. Not what the intimacy will bring, not what 
the world is going to be, not what the revolution is but what the revolution will bring. These are 
some of the few forces that you find in the 49 that will laugh at revolutions and say, "They are all 
the same. They start off good and they end up bloody." 

The power of revolution in action to expand its support. Neptune exalted. An innate 
impressionability that transforms the fence sitter into the committed. The sensitivity and potential 
to embrace and transform others. When they are sympathetic to a revolutionary course because 

they can see that the revolution will bring the principle that they want, they have enormous 
power of pulling people over to that revolution and bringing them in. 

Saturn in detriment. Stubborn, and often fatal, rejectionism. These people will say, "No, I am 
interested in change but your revolution is not going to bring what I think is necessary." They 
often are killed for that. Oversensitivity that leads to rejection of principles and others as a rule. 
'As a rule' means that these are not really revolutionaries. They are not involved in the 
revolution. They look at what are the principles that can be established after the revolution. This 
is their great concern. The moment that they have that sense, they can be very powerful. 

But, remember the wave. This is very different from sixth lines that are not directly emotional. 
Here you always have to deal with that. When you look at any of your lines in relationship to 
this, please understand what principle is important for you. You have to see how you respond to 
any given principle in time through your wave. If there is a principle that you can tolerate at the 
low end and enjoy at the high end, it is good for you. If you can only abide a principle at the high 
end and detest it at the low end, it cannot be correct for you. In other words, the wave has to 
teach you, by going through your spectrum, what principle is really correct for you, which means 
that revolution is not something that you can spontaneously jump to. That is the spleen. You 
have to wait and go through the process. By the way, what is really interesting here is that, if 
you notice that in the sixth line here, the exalted is Neptune and in its resonance in the third line, 
the exalted is Neptune. Neptune is veiled. The real truth in the sixth line, which in the emotional 
system is about what is going to awaken first to emotional awareness, is that the spirituality that 
lies in the sixth line is to recognize what revolution to be sympathetic with. But now these are 
deeply veiled processes in which we do not clearly see what is going on. The Neptunes in 
resonance with each other in the three and six. 

HEXAGRAM 50 THE CAULDRON 

The root of awareness. The 50th gate is, in that sense, where all awareness is nurtured because it is, like 
the sixth gate, a gate of fusion. It fuses all the processes that are going through the splenic center: the 
stream of taste, the collective logical process, the stream of intuition, the individual process and the 
stream of instinct, the tribal process. Each of those three streams is rooted in the 50th gate which produces 
an awareness frequency. The sixth gate produces an emotional wave. There are six of them. 

These six awareness frequencies are at the beginning of our awareness process and literally the root of it. 
The 50th gate, The Cauldron (a nice image, this big melting pot of all these different possibilities), is the 
gate of values which establishes the law within the tribe, which, in essence, is the law and the values of 
our cultures and our civilization. This is our oldest and most ancient awareness. Here, in the 50th gate are 
the frequencies that lead to what we call awareness. 

The gate of values. The potential here is to be responsible, or not. Every single gate out of the splenic 
system is a gate of primal fear. The primary fear of the 50th gate and the fear that is at the heart of all 
awareness is the fear of responsibility. The potential here is to be responsible or not, and the awareness 
potential is values. This is the tribal law giver. The laws of the tribe are rooted in this existential 
awareness. This is the channel of the law. It establishes the law in the tribe, in the community and in the 
culture. One of the things to recognize very clearly in the way in which we come together in our 
civilization is that this is all being dictated by the frequencies that originate in this 50th gate: the world we 
live in, the lives that we share with each other and the way that we share those lives. 

50.1 The Immigrant 

The Immigrant. Humbleness of origin that benefits rather than restricts destiny. Mars exalted. The desire 
to be effective and successful that builds on the most fundamental strengths while it refines its nature. The 
whole thing about this is recognizing that the fundamental strength is the foundation itself. First, you have 
to have the foundation and only from the foundation can refinement come. So, if you are an immigrant 
and you are coming to a new land, to a new consciousness, the first thing is that you have to be able to 
plant yourself somewhere and begin this process of establishing a foundation, and then the refinement can 
begin. If you come out of great poverty, something we witnessed in America, and arrive in North 
America, you will not be able to drive around in a Cadillac until you spend a long time establishing your 
foundation and slowly refining the nature, so that you can fit into the culture around. 

Venus in detriment. A dissatisfaction with or embarrassment with origins that makes an obsession of 
refinement. This can be difficult. That is, you are uncomfortable with the foundation that you have and 
you become obsessed with correcting, fixing or refining that. 

Mars exalted. The awareness that the growth and refinement of values will benefit destiny. This is the 
encouragement that all first line people need. I have 10 first lines in my chart. I was stupid for 38 years. It 
takes a long time when you have a lot of first lines to be able to develop the potential so that the 
refinement can come out, but it says something else to you. It benefits destiny. The moment that you 
recognize where your first lines are, you can also see that those are aspects in your nature that are not 
easily transferable outwards until you've really built your foundation. Those are areas in you that you 
need to focus on. These are areas that require patience and time before the refinement can come. 

A dissatisfaction with original values that demands refinement. Same process as in the Rove I'Ching. 
Think about this in terms of the law because all law began this way. This is the beginning of what we call 
our moral codes. This is the line of Moses, of Hammurabi. This is the line of establishing the original 
code. This is the first law. It may be very primitive and needs to be refined. 

In the 60's in Montreal, they decided that it was time because the city was French and it operated under 
the Napoleonic Code, and there were things they wanted to remove from the Code, such as the law about 
tying up your horse on the main street. These kinds of things. You have these old laws and, once you've 
established the foundation of civility in the society, you can begin to refine the law. This is the beginning 
of the legal process. You have a moral code which is your foundation and then you begin to refine that 
code to ultimately establish the law for civilization. 

When you have a judge sitting in a court and he has the first line, he is likely to be the kind of person who 
will go into their introspection and say, "Yes, in this particular case, perhaps the law could be refined to 
allow you this particular difference of yours." This is the nature of the line. It doesn't just say, "This is it." 
It looks into it and whatever it sees that is weak, it tries to strengthen. 

The reverse is also true. There are many people who see what is strong and try to weaken it. I am 
breaking the law since I was 13 years old. I have been smoking cannabis since I was 13. So wherever I 
go, I am breaking the law. There are many people who would like to take that strong law and make it 
weak. There is always the other side through introspection. You look at that and say, "This needs to be 
refined. Let's take the strong and make it weak." It does not just go one way. This is a frequency and, 
depending on circumstances, it is either the weakness that needs to be refined or the strength that needs to 
be refined. 

50.2 Determination 

The second line: Determination. The Sun exalted. The strength of purpose that can enjoy overcoming 
adversity to achieve its goals. The strength derived from maintaining one's values in the face of 
opposition or conditioning. This is already telling you that if you have this line, you will meet opposition. 
It tells you that, no matter what your values are, there will always be adversity. This is the projecting out 
of a value that immediately creates confrontation with others. It will always provoke that. It will always 
bring that out. 

The Venusian side: A discomfort with adversity that may lead to determined withdrawal. A lack of 
strength, where values are threatened by opposition or conditioning. The emotional wave of that is the 
wave of advance and withdrawal. On the emotional side, this is all about shyness and boldness. This is 
about projecting this field out which always brings some kind of reaction. These are values that do not 
have a real foundation. There are simply values that are being projected outwards. 

We have a classic example of that in Serbia. You have a vote that takes place and then you have the 
government that says, very determined, "No. This has to be cancelled. We remain with our values, and 
not with yours." You immediately get opposition. 

Two things happen: either you are bold and you try, as the Prima Donna, to put your wave on somebody, 
or the moment you put it out there and there is all this adversity, you withdraw. These people can be very 
bitter. All second lines can ring with bitterness. It is not their fault. This is what they are here for: to 
project out and the moment they project it out, somebody smacks them for it. It immediately brings that 
adversity out. 

The nature about the determination in the second line is both to project your value out and to be able to 
handle the adversity and, at the same time, to project it out and then withdraw from the adversity. These 
are all unstable laws and values. What is remarkable about these people is their determination. They get 
the first chance to look out of the window and they are very determined to get to the other side. 

50.3 Adaptability 

A judge that makes these laws: they will always be broken. They will demand being broken. There will 
always be something in that that somebody will have to break. Adaptability. The awareness that to 
maintain one's principles and values, the support of others is necessary. Now, this is what we would call 
making laws in constitutional assemblies, where everybody gathers around and there are all kinds of 
people that have their own personal interest in what kind of laws they want to see incorporated into the 
total law. You will always have the situation where you try to find a way to say, "Okay, you will go along 
with this law. You will not break it." These are laws that are trying to adapt to circumstances and they are 
laws that either fade off of the books or laws that get easily broken because they are usually an adaptation 
for one interest rather than another. 

On the other side you have: Discomfort with the awareness that one cannot stand alone by one's 
principles. This is where the gate wakes up and says, "Oh, I have to deal with the creatures at the other 
side. This means that I can't be me. I have to do something with them. I have to adapt and work this out 
with them so that we can live together within the law." 

Wherever you see the third line in your design, you are looking at the part of you that is actually aware of 
the fact that you are not alone. That is very nice to know and it is very important this recognition in us, 
"Oh, I am going to have to adapt to others." Some of us, in our third lines, are going to be very 
uncomfortable with that. Why do I have to adapt to others? The other side is this sense of, "If I have to 
adapt to others, I have to learn how to deal with them." Lower trigrams are very poor at being able to 
work well with others. It does not mean they can't nor does it mean that they cannot be of enormous 
value. In terms of being clear with each other in any kind of relationship, first, second and third lines are 
having trouble because they are working on what they are, and not on what the other one is. Only when 
you get to the third line, you begin this process. 

In the black book: the Moon exalted. When unable to make it alone will naturally align itself with 
nurturing and protective forces. This was Grace Kelly's line. A resentment when its natural mental gifts 
are ignored and is forced to curry favor in order to survive. In other words, "This law, your highness, is 
terrible." "Shut up, it is the law." Even if you know that it is bad for the people, even though you know 
that it is not the right thing to do, you end up having to say, "Yes, Sir" because you have to adapt. This is 
all about having to recognize, "Oh, my goodness, I have to deal with them. Otherwise, it will not work." 
That can be very beautiful, or very uncomfortable. And again, to see that in terms of all third lines. Keep 
that in mind. It is an archetype for all of them. 

50.4 Corruption 

This can be a deeply corruptive force. Remember that this is the gate of values. You have your one little 
aspect and you will go right down that line with it and you externalize it, come hell or high water. That 
can be corruptive to others, or you can be corrupted in your fixed narrow path that you are going down. 

The nature of these lines is awareness. The third line has an intuition for knowing when to adapt, and to 
whom. It is an intuition, a gift. The gift of the fourth line is the intuition to smell corruption, to know who 
is corrupt and who is corruptible. Before you can get to that point you have to be corrupted yourself and 
you have to see your own corruptibility. That is part of the process. In and of itself, this is no more 
positive or negative than any other terminology. It is simply a process. 

Keep in mind that instinct is about the nose, and intuition is about the ears. When you are dealing with 
anything having to do with the nature of the intuition, to recognize when one needs to adapt or not, or the 
intuition for corruption or not, it is what you hear. 

When you look here at the fourth line, in the Rave I'Ching it says: Corruption. A lack of enriching values. 
The first thing to see in that is the nature of resonance. First and fourth lines have a resonance to each 
other. We saw that the first line was The Immigrant who has no values, in that sense. He comes to the 
new land, has to find its foundation, develop it and refine its values. When you get to the resonance in the 
fourth line, there are no values. It is the same process. It is just at another level. 

The malefic gift of turning inferior values into material success. Given this position, Saturn's exaltation is 
that its actions are limited to selfishness and unsavoriness rather than criminality. This is about being 
focused down this one-track. Because of that, you will do anything to externalize it. There is no 
adaptation here. There is the need to externalize. You want to build your plant in Indonesia and you 
would like to do it all legally, but you can't. You have to externalize that dream of yours. Otherwise you 
never make the millions you want to make. So you go ahead and deal with inferior elements. You say, 
"How much do I have to bribe you to get that license? What will it cost me? As long as I have my one- 
track, I am willing to be corrupt here and there, as long as I can keep on externalizing." That is why, at the 
material level, that works really well: the greasing of palms. This is a judge you can buy off. It can also be 
a judge who says, "You can't buy me. I used to be available but now I am not available." 

Mars in detriment. With such energy and no traditional values, the worst can be expected. The worst to 
expect here is when you are corrupt, you get caught. In getting found out, you get the opprobrium of the 
tribe. The tribe looks at you and says, "This is a bad one. This is a Mafiosi, a gangster." 

The capacity to maintain one's strength despite inferior values. The strength is: I am going to externalize 
this value, whatever it is. The weakness lies in the fact that, because you are so caught up in having to 
externalize that, you pay. You will be corrupted simply to be able to get your way through them. 

On the other side: The potential disregard of values that may lead to corruption or the breakdown of 
defense. You are so one-tracked, "I am going to be a super vegetarian. Nothing is going to stop me. This 
is my intuition," and you may end up with a vitamin B deficiency that kills you; and "It really seems like 
this is my direction. This is what I will do. This is my one-track-mind. Nothing will take me away from 
this single track," and then you can be deeply corrupted. Not necessarily in your track, but all around you. 

Recently, an Italian company in the whole 'dirty-hands-business' in Italy, had all of these scandals. They 
were paying bribes and they could not list the bribes in their books. So the books were distorted and, due 
to that, the assets and the values of the company were distorted, and how much money they were actually 
making was distorted. When this all finally came out, they were sued by the stock market and 
shareholders because all of that was false. 

You see that you can end up with this chain reaction. You do your little corruption on the side here 
because it works and the whole thing keeps on snowballing until it blows up in your face. The fourth line 
is brotherhood/sisterhood and the wave of kindness/meanness. All fourth lines are inherently corrupt. All 
of them are trying to get out their fixed line and, in trying to do that, they are willing to make 
compromises and are willing to do things that are not necessarily of value to them. 

50.5 Consistency 

The fifth line is called Consistency. When continuity has brought success, it should not be hampered with. 
Saturn exalted. The disciplined and natural conservatism to avoid unnecessary change. Mars in detriment. 
A perverse reaction to rebel against the methodology of one's very success. Neither one of those is about 
good or bad. This is the completion of a hexagram process and therefore, you come to the point in the 
fifth line where you recognize that what has worked shall remain. So, you have a law that says, "Thou 

shalt not kill," and it is consistent and you want to keep that consistency but, at the same time, because 
you are at the completion of a process, you can see that what brought success in the past will not 
necessarily bring the same success in the future. You can rebel against the very thing that brought 
success. These are the only judges that can really change our codes. They are the only ones that can 
legitimately change the values in the tribe. They speak from a perspective in which they have gone 
through the process. 

When I say that: if you have a fifth line, genetically you are already equipped at that level. It is already 
there, as an essence. That process is already complete. Wherever you carry the fifth line, you have the 
completion in your hexagram process and in that, you are either going to have the discipline to maintain 
that, whatever direction it is bringing you, or you recognize that although it brought success in the past, it 
has to be changed. 

The conservative awareness that basic principles should not be abandoned casually. You notice that it 
does not say that you can't abandon them. It says that it shouldn't be abandoned casually. The nature of 
the fifth line is, "All right. This is what I am. I am not easily going to allow that to change." 

But then you come to the other side: When effectively stimulated, the drive to rebel against basic 
principles. When there is enough evidence, when there is enough to stimulate that recognition, then those 
principles can be changed. 

Everything that I say to you about the nature of these lines, I am saying to you in the awareness that we 
work in mechanics together. At the mundane level, this can be very perverse. Somebody who is not aware 
of it, somebody who has a job and they are doing it very well and it is successful for them, and they have 
the fifth line: they may just as likely quit. Simply because, yes, it brought success, but what is next? What 
else is there? Let me do something else. This is the mundane level of it. 

The aware level of it is to recognize that one cannot abandon that casually. Yes, if there is enough 
stimulation, it may make sense in that way. Speaking of stimulation, it is a very abstract term. It may 
make sense in that way to be able to say, "All right, it is time to change this principle." The key here is 
consistency. After all, the fifth line is always going to speak for what is the essence of a hexagram, and 
that consistency is necessary for us. 

50.6 Leadership 

Every sixth line has the capacity to lead or not. If you look at all of them very carefully, you see that they 
are of enormous importance to us in our process. Here we have Leadership. Venus exalted. The gift in a 
position of power to maintain harmony even in severity. The Moon in detriment. An inherent moodiness 
that in a position of power may at times alienate or offend and affect overall efficiency. 

In the white book: The strength to maintain one's values with vigor and continue to have harmonic 
relationships with others. If you hold on to that value of transition, you are looking for the transition. You 
are able to deal with people but it does not mean that anything is going to happen. It does not mean that 
you lead them, or not. It does not mean that you will play the role of the leader. You will only do so if it is 
more than just leading people across the river. "If I just have to lead you across the river, why don't you 
get a boy scout? If you want to take me to the land of the universe, terrific: I will lead." 

The other side is: The strength to maintain one's values but at the expense of harmonic relationships. 
"Yes, I know that you would like to have me. Tough, I am looking for what is beyond." That is the sixth 
line and it can offend people in that way. Not only that, so often people want sixth lines to lead them, and 
they refuse to be leaders. After all, this has to do with an emotional resonance of sympathy and apathy. I 

am deeply apathetic about being a leader. I have a lot of sixth line and third line resonances. The sixth line 
is not about automatically saying, "This sixth line leads." 

The sixth line itself is not in the business of propagandizing the hexagram. That is the fifth line. The sixth 
line is saying, "Yes, okay, I don't want to lead you because I don't want to go there." What happens to 
them is that they have difficulties in their relationships. At one level, they can be harmonic because 
people will recognize and are interested in and attracted to the sixth line because it takes them some place 
else, but on the other hand, due to that apathy that is built into them, they have a taste for when to lead 
and whom to lead, or not. 

One person can come up to me and ask me to lead him, and I refuse. Another person can come up with 
exactly the same request and I say, "Yes." That is the nature of the sixth line. It is not universal. It is 
deeply selective at that level and it comes from a position of power. This intrinsic power that lies here and 
all sixth lines that say, "Yes, I have accomplished all these five steps. I have all that in my background. I 
am at the end of this process. I am looking for something else. Don't bog me down. Don't hold me here. I 
am going to the next line." The next line is the 28.1, Preparation, the desire to be effective. That is what 
the leadership is looking for. 

HEXAGRAM 51 THE AROUSING 

The 51 is the greater willpower, if you will. The Arousing: thunder over thunder. It says above the lines: 
The ability to respond to disorder and shock through recognition and adaptation. 'The ability to respond': 
remember the way in which the ego motor works. The ego motor works on willpower. That is, unless 
there is a will, there is no way. If that ego needs to have a rest, nothing gets done. Only if that ego is ready 
can that willpower be expressed and then there is an ability of that willpower to respond to disorder and 
shock. In doing so, it responds through recognizing what it is and adapting to it. Here we have the gate of 
competitiveness, the gate of the warrior, of courage or foolishness. 

51.1 Reference 

The way to understand any hexagram is to really carefully think about what is stated in the first line 
because first line will always give you that fundamental knowledge of a hexagram. Here, it is called 
Reference. This first line is an overview line, so it means that the ability to adapt to shock at its 
foundation requires experience. It is not like you are equipped from birth to be able to adapt to and 
recognize the shock wave. You need the experience first. In other words, you have to be tested in the fire 
of the 51 before you understand or can work out how to deal with that fire. 

The advantage of previous crisis experience. This is the overview of this line, so you know that 
willpower, the deepest will, the courageous will, is something that is tempered in the fire of experience. It 
is not something that is just there, and because of that, it is something that can be shattered in that 
experience and never get to the full stage. 

One side is Pluto exalted. Because of the movement of Pluto and Neptune, there are certain aspects in 
design that are not active genetically in our time. I'll give you a list, which is very important when it 
comes to readings. (See Appendix: Neptune and Pluto - Outer Planet Transits for full list). Understand 
what I mean: the channel of initiation, 25/51, is in Aries. Pluto has not been in Aries since the beginning 
of the 19th century, a very long time ago. That means that nobody that is alive today carries this energy 
within them and it means that this genetic material does not exist in the world. The exalted does not exist 
because it is from Pluto which will not get to Aries for many, many years. Only when it gets there will 
that genetic material exist in the world. So, when it comes to Neptune and Pluto, their cycles are much 
greater than our individual lifetimes and thus we are dealing with planets that, in the genetic cycle of 
things, imprint us and then go away. 

In the 5 there is no way to read the exaltation now. It does not exist in the world and will not come into 
the world until that activation of the 25 (which will be activated first) and out of the 25 will come the 
possibility of the Pluto exalted coming into effect. What that means is that when we are dealing with the 
foundation of Initiation, with the foundation of Arousing in our time, what we have is the Venus in 
detriment: A tendency to emotional withdrawal after a shock, instead of this capacity to really 
successfully deal with shock. It means that this is going to require time in withdrawal. In other words, the 
5 1 learns to develop its courage through experience but any time that the 5 1 goes through an experience at 
the first line level, it means, literally, that it has to pull away and it has to withdraw before it can be healed 
again. This is about the rest necessary for the ego and it is an extended rest in order to deal with the 
experience. 

In the white book: The weakness of the ego in times of challenge. This is the foundation of this hexagram 
in our time. When you see people with the 5 1 . 1 , it is so important for them that they need long periods of 
time in order to heal from shock. I have my Personality Moon in 51.1. After my experience with the 
voice, which was an extraordinary shock to my being, I spend years recuperating from that. Years of 

dealing with that shock, having to withdraw. I have the advantage that I also have the 51.5. 1 have my Sun 
there, so it was not to the point that I withdrew so much that I no longer was part of the world. 

When I was in America this year, a man came to see me in Sedona and he brought with him a diary of a 
friend of his. He said this friend could not come. He came to tell me that this man had an experience in 
January of 1987 in which he experienced a voice. The only thing that he remembered about it was that the 
voice was going to give him information from the Book of Letters. This man showed me the man's diary 
from thatJanuary of 1987, in which he had written about the Voice from the Book of Letters. He could not 
come because he has been institutionalized ever since. He cannot feed by himself; he cannot clean 
himself. This was somebody who got fried in this experience. So, one of the things to recognize about the 
51.1: the foundation of dealing with shock is very weak in our time, and great shocks require deep 
withdrawal in order to heal from them. 

51.2 Withdrawal 

When we come to the second line, anybody who is looking into somebody that has a 51.2, they see that 
they have the will and that they do not use it because they are in withdrawal. 51.2's are often accused of 
cowardice because people who look inside see the will but do not see anything being done with it. Again, 
rest is natural for the ego. 

Withdrawal. Mars exalted. The recognition of the mechanics of shock that indicates when withdrawal is 
the only logical action. These are unlikely heroes. You can pull them out and they may turn out to be 
deeply courageous but again, it is the lower trigram. They are not ready for that kind of interaction. 

Mercury in detriment. Being too smart for one's own good and rejecting withdrawal in the vain belief that 
one can outsmart natural forces. This gate has the gift of understanding the odds, like in gambling, about 
what it takes to survive a shock and be competitive. These are people that naturally pull back from that. It 
has to be pulled out by others. That can be successful or not. They can be encouraged to be brave and it 
turns out to be folly, and they end up being fools rather than being courageous. 

In the white book: Instinctive withdrawal when the power of the ego is threatened. In other words, this 
inner knowing to realize that it will not make any difference how much willpower I have; I will not be 
able to jump across that chasm. If I try, I will die, so I'd better withdraw and find another way. 

The other side is: The egoism to reject withdrawal and face possible defeat. "Everybody says that I should 
be able to jump across that chasm, so I will," and of course, they don't make it. 

51.3 Adaptation 

The third line of the 51 is a line that gives its name to the structure of the hexagram. It is called the line of 
Adaptation. As a line of adaptation, please understand again my reference to what is written above the 
lines. This is about responding to disorder. Courage is something that has to be called. Everything about 
the ego is about the ego being called. If the ego is not called out, it does not play. If the ego is not 
massaged, it will not go out and do its thing. In this third line, we get to the ability to learn from one's 
mistakes. 

The Sun exalted. The life-sustaining awareness that thinks on its feet and thus creates opportunities. This 
is a competitiveness that rises to the occasion. In other words, it adapts to the situation. The first three 
lines do not know where the shock is coming from. The fourth, fifth and sixth lines are different. They are 
transpersonal. Here, it is always a surprise. So the third line has a real gift. It knows how to dance its way 
out of a difficulty. 

Jupiter in detriment. The destabilization that occurs when one's field of normal activity is radically and 
unpredictably disturbed, where the tendency is withdrawal rather than adaptation. These people are as 
likely to be courageous as they are to be cowardly. The ones that can run forward are the ones that can 
also run away the quickest. It is the nature of the ego because it is looking for its rest and it wants to stay 
alive. 

The 51 st gate is the gate of the gall bladder, of bile. It means that it is a gate that is rooted in its ability 
not only to deal with challenge but to be deeply competitive. 'Chutzpa' is if you kill your parents and, 
while you are on trial, you ask the judge for mercy because you are an orphan. 

We have a movement that goes from the 40 to the 5 1 . The 40/37 is a bridge, often a spiritual one, and the 
40 naturally looks towards adaptation. This gift is something that works really well in the moment on the 
exalted side, but the moment that everything is in total disorder and chaotic, it does not work anymore. 
Then the natural tendency of the ego takes over that says, "I don't have it. I will pull back and withdraw." 

Adaptation. The power of spontaneity in times of challenge. 'In times of challenge': it has to come to it. 

On the other side: The ego that may be destabilized in times of challenge. Most of us only have to deal 
with the mundane quality of shock in our lives and, because we only have to deal with that mundane 
quality, the 51.3 can usually handle it. It is an ego power after all, but when things totally and radically 
change, the 51.3 falls apart. It does okay when it is in a traffic jam but in an earthquake, it falls apart and 
goes only for its withdrawal. Don't get on an earthquake with a 51.3. 

51.4 Limitation 

When you get to the upper trigram, you get to the ability to have transpersonal skills. The 51.4 not only 
recognizes what is going on, but it recognizes very clearly its way to be competitive in the world because 
it knows what it has to meet. But it is fixed, like all fourth lines. Because it is fixed, there is always a 
limitation. 

Here the line is called Limitation. Uranus exalted. A pure inventiveness and sometimes genius to find 
some opportunity even in the midst of the most devastating shocks. These people understand that the 
world is a place that is competitive (survival of the fittest). They know that. All 51's know that you have 
to fight and be competitive to be a success in this life, to be centered, to be awake. There is this deep 
competitiveness that drives this willpower. There is a genius here, which is that as long as everything is 
not too bizarre, this ego can find a way to be one -directional and to be able to compete in the world. 

Mercury in detriment. A reasoned make-do mentality that is ineffectual in times of severe shock. In other 
words, being one -tracked and expecting the environment for competition to be a certain way. Like the 
English soldiers who came to America to conquer it: they were there in their bright red and white 
uniforms with banners and bugles, marching along in the forest, and they had a different kind of 
competitor that did not play by the rules. Those soldiers that were marching in line, like all fourth lines 
exalted, if they met other soldiers marching in a line they would be able to handle that shock and they 
would be able to be competitive in that situation and might come out with their medals and their rewards. 
But the Americans did not play fair. They hid behind the trees where it was hard to see them and they shot 
them in the back of the head while they were marching along and, all of a sudden, those men marching 
across in that line, all of that make -do business falls apart. 

The warrior ego that will find some way to answer the challenge; but, on the other side: The superficial 
ego that lacks the resources and depth to answer challenges. And in this case, not simply a challenge, but 
a challenge that is really outside of its experience. 

So much about courage has to do with experience. It is not about being a fool. The courageous one always 
makes a calculation. They are not stupid. The ego wants to live, so it makes that calculation. The moment 
that the pattern is unreliable, that is the moment that that ability to be competitive and succeed will fall 
apart. This line only has one strategy of shock. Either it fits or it misses. They are stuck with their way. 
All fourth lines can learn but it is painful because they have to rebuild their strategy. 

51.5 Symmetry 

I have my Personality Moon in the first line and my Personality Sun in the fifth line. In my experience 
with the voice (these are all speculations and thus they are meaningless, but just to illustrate that...) if I 
was someone that only had the 5 I would not be here today sharing Human Design with you and teaching 
you because I would never have recovered from the shock. The gift or the good fortune in my design is 
that I have the Sun in the fifth line, so I have the exaltation in this business of shock. It is this exaltation 
that kept me alive and allowed me to be here today and to share the knowledge that was given to me. 

The fifth line is a projection from the outside. It is a way people want to see willpower and courage. A 
favorite story of mine: when I was in high school and I was on a track team, I tried running for a while. I 
was doing the mile. I was not particularly good or bad and after some time, I got bored and decided to 
quit, and I went to the coach to tell him my intentions. He said to me: please wait until after the 
tournament this coming weekend because "When you are in the race, everybody runs faster." 

This is the whole thing about the ego. I have this whole channel, so people can be more competitive than I 
am, simply by taking in that energy. As a fifth line, it is always projected on me that I either have the 
courage or I don't. Anybody with a fifth line has an advantage in that they can live up to other people's 
projections and expectations and therefore benefit from it, or fail to live up to those expectations and be 
crushed by their condemnation. This is the path of all fifth lines. 

Symmetry. The Sun exalted. Perfected illumination that in grasping the nature of the shock can transform 
its normal patterns into a symmetrical adaptation that rides the shock and avoids its devastation. This is 
the capacity to deal with any kind of shock: simply to be able to move with it to find a way to flow with 
the nature of that shock. 

Mars in detriment. A tendency in seeking the core, to harmonize with one shock only to be overwhelmed 
by the next. This is about egoism. Courage falls apart when the ego comes in. This is about willpower. 
Ego belongs correctly to the 26 and the 21, but it does not belong to the 51. 

The warrior does not stand there and gloat over their victory. They do not. But the detriment here: The 
egoism to indulge in victory and lose vigilance. This is the person that, while they are yelling, "I did it," 
somebody cuts their head off because they were so busy feeling good about what they just managed to do. 

In the exalted: The perfection of the warrior ego through instinctive adaptation. The whole business of 
courage is: if you are one -tracked, you can fall. The moment that you are willing to flow in that, you have 
your opportunity for survival. I am expected to initiate people. That is why I am Ra Uru Hu. People say, 
"He initiates me," and it turned out that he could. So it just grows. This is all projection. I have a 5/1 
profile. People were projecting on me all my life, and still do. 

The difficulty that lies in the ego is when the different strains of the ego are confused with each other, 
when the 40 becomes the little egoist, because it is not supposed to be. It is just about will. Those 
competitors in the world that we most admire are not the brightest, are not the ones who laugh at the 
opponents that they defeat. We are most impressed with humble warriors, with competitors that we can 
admire for their skills but who don't go blowing their whistle all the time and telling you how wonderful 
they are. The moment the ego becomes part of competitiveness instead of it being willpower, that is the 
moment that spirituality is lost. That is the moment that the ego says, "I have free will. My will can do 
anything." The moment that the ego is taken away from the 51, in that moment, it has its opportunity for 
spiritual initiation. 

This is why this is a channel of Initiation. Because without the ego, it is no longer "I did that." It is the 
warrior after the battle that gets down on their hands and knees and thanks the gods that they survived 
because they know damn well that it was not up to them. They were just really lucky. This is a spiritual 
moment in which one sees that the power that lies within oneself is not one's own, that one is helpless in 
the world regardless of what motor you run on, that there are greater forces at work. But when the ego is 
part of that will, all is lost. It is gone. The spirituality is gone because the claim that is, "This is my talent, 
my power, my will." This is where the human psyche begins to fall apart, because it is a great lie. 

51.6 Separation 

The sixth line here is affected by the Pluto phenomenon, so we only have the exaltation here. All sixth 
lines are different. The line and its keynote, Separation, is the mystical name for the structure of a sixth 
line. It is about being separate. All sixth lines, in a sense, are about that: the idea of sitting on the roof of a 
house and looking out and not really being clear about what one should do in one's process. Like all sixth 
lines, like the transition. 

The Sun exalted. In times of crisis when all those around are confused and in disorder, the ability not to 
succumb to panic but to have the will and vitality to survive it alone. All sixth lines, in a sense, are alone. 
Not alone in the sense of gates of aloneness, but alone in terms of not being committed to the nature of 
their hexagram, unlike any other line that represents it. They are always somehow borrowing from the 
44.6 Aloofness, to being above all of that. 

When you meet a 51.6, do not expect to see or feel their competitiveness because for them it is a question 
of, "Why bother if it does not center me? Why bother if it does not lead to mutation? Why bother when it 
does not lead to knowing?" This is always the great question for the sixth line. 

In the white book: The power of the ego to meet challenges alone. But it also is the ego staying alone. 
Remember that the 51 has a natural place coming out of the 40, and the mystical nature of sixth lines is 
that they represent the loners. They represent those that have their own unique separate process that may 
or may not integrate with the whole. But it is not fair to expect of a 51.6 what you can call out of a 51.5. 
They may not, regardless of their power, enter into any kind of conflict or competitiveness, jump over any 
chasm. They may just sit and stare and wait for that opportunity. But they will be alone and separate in 
their process and they will not enjoy having anyone trying to push them into displaying their willpower. 

You really don't get a sense of them as being warriors. These can be people that are deeply misleading 
because, at the moment that there really is something that they must deal with, that they know will center 
them in their process, they have enormous capability and wisdom. The wisdom to know how to compete 
and how to initiate is always the possibility of the sixth line. The 51.6's are people who wait for a sign 
from God. It is very common. 

The 51.6 leads to the 42. 1. The 42.1, Diversification, is about the foundation of what the cyclical process 
is about. The channel of Maturation represents the cycles of the experiential way. Diversification is about 
the recognition that there are as many ways as there are humans. The dilemma for the 51.6, in trying to 
figure out where to be competitive and where to put its will, is that it is confronted with so many different 
pathways and, in looking at all those different pathways, again, the keynote for the 51 is to learn from 
experience. The 51.6 needs to see and recognize the experience of the many ways. This is quite a process 
and it keeps it back because there are so many possibilities that may or may not fulfill its potential. 

HEXAGRAM 52 KEEPING STILL (MOUNTAIN) 

We switch over to the logical format. When looking at the 58th hexagram, there is the obvious polarity of 
the 58 and 52. They are an opposition in the Zodiac. I have pointed out to you the importance of energy 
for the logical process, that is, the need to be able to energize experimentation in order to be able to 
guarantee or secure the future for the collective. 

The 52nd hexagram, Keeping Still, is the gate of stillness. It is an energy that is focused and it is the 
pressure to concentrate. This is the enormous difference between the 52 and the 53. This needing to be 
focused and concentrated is so diametrically opposed to the cyclical process of beginning things and 
finishing them. One of the things that are very clear about the nature of the logical process and format is 
that, in order for logical things to succeed, there must be a deep identification in order that repetition and 
focusing is possible. One has to be deeply identified with the formula in order to spend a lifetime proving 
or disproving it. This is quite a dedication. 

The fuel quality is passive and this is not about stress but about tension. The great depression of the 52 is 
the tension that one will not find the right thing to focus on. It is very depressing for this energy that has 
its pressure on concentrating when there is nothing worthwhile to concentrate on. 

Something very important to understand is that the next step of the Plutonian process is to go into the 9th 
gate. (Pluto entered the 9th gate in 1998.) So we will have an enormous amount of power for a very deep 
focus and concentration. It is the plutonic field that will be the source of that focus of attention. 

Above the lines of the 52 it says, Temporary and self-imposed inaction for the benefit of assessment. This 
is the whole thing of what the tension is. The tension is there during the assessment process because there 
is nothing to do. Unless there is something to concentrate on, there is nothing to do. 

That is why I joke and call this the gate of the Buddha. Keeping still (Mountain). Buddha sits under the 
tree with his 52 and he does not know what to do because he knows that he is not in charge of the doing. 
So he just sits there. He is enlightened because he does not have any tension while he is sitting there. This 
is the truth for all. The moment that you recognize that while he is sifting there, he is waiting for the 
perfect opportunity to find something worth concentrating on. In that moment of finding something worth 
concentrating on, there is the power to really concentrate and thus there is real fulfillment in that process. 

52.1 Think before you speak 

Think about all the pressure that is on the 52nd gate. There is a lot of pressure on the 58th gate to commit 
its energy to experimentation, and there is enormous pressure on the 52nd to commit its energy to 
concentration. But the reality is that the theme of this gate, the first line, the introspection, is: Think 
before you speak. 

Earth exalted in the foundation of the hexagram is the real grounding. This is the real stability in the 
logical process. The pause that is so profound that it leads to silence. There is nothing to do and nothing 
to say until the moment that there is something of value to concentrate on. This annoys people. Anybody 
who is involved in the logical process is desperate and hungry for energy and gets really annoyed that 
Buddha is under the tree when the fields need to be plowed. They get very annoyed that the energy is not 
available to figure out and control who is going to plow, when it will get plowed. Who will keep the 
records and how are we going to concentrate on all of that. That energy is missing and therefore, there are 
all kinds of forces. This is a collective gate and the most important collective process for us because it 
ensures our health and stability. If these people are not doing, are not providing their energy, they have all 
kinds of pressure from other people. This pressure begins in the detriment. 

Mars in detriment. Speaking first... (under pressure to commit their energy) ...and living with the 
consequences afterwards. 

In the Book of Letters: The pacification of energy that leads to stillness. "It is not time. I will not commit 
myself to this process of intense focus and concentration unless there is something there which is of 
value. There has to be." 

The Martian side is: Energy that cannot be stilled. These are the two sides of the concentrated process. 
These are the two sides of the way logic operates. Those forces in the 52 that do keep still and wait, their 
energy is of enormous value when it is committed. Those who are always ready, like the Mars, to step out 
of that, never get the focus and concentration necessary for their process in life. 

Let me try to clarify that even further for you. The 58 and the 52 are in opposition to each other. Both of 
these gates are the only natural fuels for the logical process. So, when anybody meets the 52nd gate, they 
want it to act like the 58th gate. In other words, they want the 52 to act like a motor gate and just simply 
fuel the activity of correction and challenging authority. That is not what the 52nd gate is about. It is 
about using energy passively. It is not about rushing out into the fields to plow them. It is about sitting 
under a tree, imagining how a field can be properly plowed and not making any kind of commitment to 
the collective until one has figured out in one's concentration, in one's focus, that there are certain ways 
that the fields should be plowed. While the person is sitting under the tree, all of its friends are working in 
the fields and they would love to have that motor energy of the 52. The 52 is at its best when it is sitting 
under that tree and not moving a muscle, but musing about the nature of field plowing. 

That focus and concentration is what the collective needs. The logical collective requires that. It is not the 
58th gate. Because we only have these two gates and because the logic is starved for energy, the 52 is 
under enormous pressure to act like the 58 and not be what it really is. The 52 is the pause, the silence for 
the concentration, for the focus. This is where the contribution can be made. 

52.2 Concern 

The second line is about projection. What is projected outwards here is the nature of this hexagram which 
is that this person can be focused. This person then is under pressure to concentrate. When they are 
looking at a magazine and you walk up to them and say, "Do you want a cup of coffee?" they get really 
annoyed because they are trying to focus on what is in front of them. They are projecting out this field. 

It is called Concern. Venus exalted. The pause that is initiated to benefit others. Mars in detriment. A 
selfish and abrupt pause that may endanger others unnecessarily. By the way, they are the same thing. 

In the white book: The pressure to restrain energy for the benefit of others; or The pressure to selfishly 
restrain energy at the expense of others. All of that is about projection. Remember, the person with the 
second line is not introspective. They are putting out a field of energy and it is being projected on by 
either side. So, if you are a person who has the Venus here, it is always projected on you that you are 
sitting back and being focused and concentrated for the benefit of everybody else. You are sitting under a 
tree and trying to figure out how to best plow the fields. If you have the other side, everybody is saying, 
out of that projection, "They are sitting under a tree because they are selfish and because they do not want 
to work like we want to work, and they are not doing a damn thing under that tree." 

When the 52 is connected to the throat, they can do. For example, you take a 14- year-old child in middle- 
school and you sit them down for an examination; their focus and concentration will burn more calories 

than a 20 kilometer walk. So it is not about not doing. There are all kinds of doing. The energy is being 
used, but passively. 

52.3 Controls 

When you are dealing with the first to third lines in the 52, you are dealing with collective circuitry. You 
know right away that it is very difficult for these people at times to deal with this phenomenon. After all, 
first to third lines are not really equipped to deal with the other side. That is not their focus. Their focus is 
much more internalized. When you get to the third line, the line of trial and error, you have an aspect of 
the first and second line but you have this trial and error which is immediately going to bump into others. 
The third line brings in the beginnings of the interaction with the other side and this is where the whole 
trial and error phenomenon is. 

It is called Controls. It says: External enforcement of inaction. If you have a child with the 52.3, it is told, 
"You go into your room and concentrate." External enforcement of inaction. "No, you can't get out and 
play. You sit there and practice the piano." 

Saturn exalted. The ability by its very nature to understand restraint with the potential in acceptance to use 
the period to redefine strategies. The energy for acceptance in inaction. What happens on this side is that 
these people are always going to be restrained by outside forces. Those outside forces will restrain them, 
but not all the time. So, as long as on this side they can accept the restraint, it is okay. The child that is 
told that it must practice the piano may one day look back and say, "I am so grateful that my parents 
forced me to practice because this is my life and I love this instrument, but I hated the practicing back 
then." In other words, this is the part of the format that has to be strongly guided by its interaction with 
others. 

There is a lot of trial and error in that because remember, those people who are logical, who will gravitate 
to somebody who has the 52, they want the 52 to be like the 58. They want them to be a motor energy that 
will fuel manifestation or generation, and that they will fuel activity, rather than accepting that the 52 is 
there to fuel passive focus and concentration. 

The other side is Venus in detriment. A deep dissatisfaction with controls that disturbs tranquility, leads 
to emotional withdrawal and affects vision. The pressure of restraint disturbs tranquility. These are the 
people who are forced to practice and who really hate it. It disturbs them because it takes them away from 
the stillness they had before they were told that they had to practice. These are the ones that don't end up 
playing the instrument in their lives. They end up being focused on whatever is natural for them but have 
a deep resistance to being controlled. Again, this is all trial and error. There will be a lot of mistakes along 
the way. 'Miss-take', like in the movies, is just another 'take' and nothing bad. 

52.4 Self-discipline 

The fourth line is actually the exalted line because you have a channel that is all about being fixed and 
focused. We know that fourth line themes are about being fixed and one-tracked and single-minded. So, 
obviously the nature of this fourth line in this particular gate and channel is really the key force at work in 
this hexagram. 

It says: Self -discipline. Saturn exalted. Perfected self-discipline and restraint that deals easily and wisely 
with impulsive temptations. The energy for restraint which recognizes the value of stillness and focus. 
Basically, rather than trying to intellectualize that, the root center is not aware. The 52.4's are people who, 
on principle, focus and concentrate, which means that they are focused and concentrated on everything. 
They take their time over what to buy, to see, where to go and what to do in their lives. They will always 

require and (because it is built into them) are fixed in needing the spaces of silence, this pause where they 
go through and work it all out and can finally come to some kind of decision. 

Jupiter in detriment. Though responsive to the need of a principled control based on the understanding of 
conditions, there is a tendency due to its natural expansiveness to doubt and restlessness. In other words, 
essentially it operates exactly the same way. These fourth line people are very fixed on being focused. 
Everything for them is about being focused. The only difference with the Jupiter is that this planet, once 
in a while, says, "I don't do this. Why are we focused on this? Is this the right thing to be focused on?" 
This is something that can come out of this energy in the fourth line. When you meet these people, you 
have to see that no one can ever have the power to take these people out of their focus. They can only 
participate in the focus with them. Remember that the fourth line knows that there is a 9th gate over there. 
It recognizes that, and when it meets the other side which needs focus and concentration, they together 
can really bring the format to fruition. 

If you take somebody in a classroom and you have the fourth line of the 52, and you have the 9. 1 or the 
9.4, you will have the classroom filled with people who are deeply focused and concentrated because this 
is the ideal for what we call research. It is the ideal for being fixed on the repetition of the pattern and all 
the other things that go with the logical process. 

For other people who are not logical, these people are not to be understood. They have this incredible 
power gate and the other circuits bang into that and say, "I want some energy. Give me the energy," and 
they do not get this active energy from the 52. They get passive energy. It is very difficult for them to 
come to these 52.4 people because they will not break their focus. They will not lift their head and look at 
you if they are caught up in something. They will annoy others because they won't break their focus, and 
many of us call these people neurotic. This is the great line of neurosis but not in the sense that they are 
neurotic (they are not); they are living out their nature, but in the sense of how it is perceived by others 
because they do not seem to be able to break their focus. They even appear to be obsessive. They are not. 
This is a very fixed line in a very fixed gate. It is very fixed and that is its way. They have the focus. 

They have what is called 'the brown study' which is when you look out the window but you don't see. 
This is focus without concentration. So you have somebody who is sitting in front of their newspaper and 
they are starring at the newspaper but they are not reading anything. They are in a deep focus which 
annoys other people. Are you reading that paper? 

Obviously, with the 9 there, when Pluto is coming in that gate, this capacity to focus gets narrowed into 
its concentrated field. Then the clarity comes and the process begins. These 52.4 people can be seen as 
very rigid and cold because they seem to ignore you. The 52.4's can be uncomfortable for other people, 
but anybody who is carrying the circuitry that goes from the 9 to the 5/15 to the 31/7, does not have that 
reaction to them. They are very much aware of whom these people are, and they are always seeking them 
out. 

52.5 Explanation 

Everything about this focus is in order to focus on detail. The gate on the other side is the Taming Power 
of the Small. The 62nd gate, the only other gate of detail, is also part of this logical circuit which is being 
fueled by this format energy. So detail is very important. There is no detail possible without focus. The 
reality is that this fifth line is how the outside sees this hexagram, and what they see is the capacity for 
explanation. 

Think about what it is like. You have a group of people that are discussing something. Let's say they are 
politicians. They are talking all night and they are going back and forth. There is one person in the group 

who said nothing. The moment that that person begins to speak, everybody listens because they respect 
the long silence. There is something about these people who are focused that we respect. We respect the 
fact that they are really going through everything and therefore they are really able to tell us. This fifth 
line gets projected on. They have that opportunity to become that kind of fuel for that process, to use their 
focus to fuel detail which is on the other side, which is what they are looking for and what they need. 

This is the universalization of this hexagram. What that means is that, universally on this planet, what is 
built into us is the recognition that only after there has been this focus and concentration is there anything 
really worth respecting when it comes to knowledge. We are all deeply impressed when a theory we hear 
about suddenly becomes something that is proven valid and brought into the world. There are all kinds of 
people working on that, being focused and concentrated to bring it to that final point, and this is what we 
respect in the logical process. The thing is that the 52.5 people are projected on to be ready to focus on the 
details. They may or may not be focused. It is simply a projected field. 

The line is called Explanation. In times of inaction, the often important ability to explain ones position. 
The Earth exalted, like in the first line which means that this is a very stable force that both defines the 
exalted nature of the hexagram and defines the way the exalted is perceived from the outside. The often 
terse but exceedingly accurate statement. This is the person who sits up all night and finally says, "That is 
all wrong. Let me tell you how it works." 

In the white book: Where inaction and focus can lead to detail. It can lead to detail. Remember that it is 
not complete without its process on the other side. 

Pluto in detriment. Pluto is coming to the 9th gate in December 1997 which means that this detriment will 
be the active theme in the world, and all the babies that are born during this transit that have the 52, will 
have this aspect fixed in them. This will be a very important vibration that will come into the world in the 
next few years. It will be around for about 70 or 80 years. Because it is Pluto, it means that this particular 
aspect of our logical process, the aspect of our universalization, hasn't been in the world for a long time. 
A convolution whose enigmatic nature is revealed in unpredictable circumstances and normally 
misunderstood. What you have here is: Where too much inaction can lead to a loss of focus and not to 
detail. 

This age is coming upon us. When I go to America, one of the things that I discover is that people don't 
go to work anymore. They don't have to. They sit in their guarded apartment complex that has armed 
guards at the bottom, with their computer. They are connected to the headquarters of their company. They 
have a supermarket, a bank, a pharmacy inside of their building. They never have to go out into the street. 
In the Western world, we have an evolution that is taking us towards this detriment which means that we 
are getting more and more inaction. There will be these deep passive processes that will overtake us on 
the planet. The children born during this transit will live in a great technological age. They will live in a 
virtual world where they do not have to go anywhere, where going somewhere will be very dangerous. 
This is something that is coming into the program. 

The enigmatic nature of the convolution means that nobody knows what they are focused on. It is a 
misunderstanding about the nature of their silence, of their passive ability. In the end, they can explain 
themselves but there is no throat here. This energy will not speak. 

In the white book it says, '...too much inaction.' This is the enigmatic-ness, the inability to really be able 
to understand why that person is silent, why they are being passive because it does not seem to follow any 
logical order. It seems very illogical to those who experience that from them. Other people put pressure 
on them to explain themselves and they can't. The moment that they are forced to try to bring it out before 
they have completed their own very long inaction process, what comes out can lead to problems. 

The genetic capacity here is simply to be still. It is projected on them that they can be still, but everybody 
expects that out of that stillness comes an explanation. The people who have the detriment do not 
necessarily come out of that stillness with any explanation at all. Out of that stillness there is just stillness 
and this is impossible for logical people to understand. Why are you supposed to be concentrating on 
something? It is like the kid who is told to focus on a book that they have to read, and the teacher asks 
them whether they have read the book. They say, "Yes, but I was not concentrating." This is this side. If it 
is projected on them that they have to be silent and read the book, they do so but they do not come up 
with the details telling what the book is all about. What they talk about is, "It is nice to read this book. It 
is very quiet and peaceful in here." If somebody asks them to explain why, they can't and this infuriates 
the others. They say to them, "but you are reading the book. Don't you know where it took place?" "I 
don't know," and this explanation signals, "Leave me in peace." 

It is like the 3-D book. If you focus properly, you can see the three dimensional images inside. So, that is 
the exalted of it. The detriment would be that you are looking at the pattern, you can enjoy that but you 
don't get to see what the detail is inside. It is funny because only certain people can go through and get to 
the third dimension and other people can never get to the third dimension, and some people can only get 
in there if they are alone. They can't do it if there is somebody around them pressuring them to see the 
detail. That is a classic example for this line. It is a question of perspective. When you look into the 
future, into infinity, then you get the right focus. When you look close and cross your eyes, you get the 
negative image. It is convoluted. It gets turned the other way and you don't see the detail, but you have the 
focus. 

52.6 Peacefulness 

When you get to the sixth line it is called Peacefulness. The word peace shows up in quite a few sixth 
lines. You have The Peacemaker in the 6.6. Peacefulness is one of the great longings of sixth lines: the 
peacefulness of being able to look out at the whole circuitry and see the whole circuitry come to 
fulfillment. In seeing it come to fulfillment, there is this sense of peace that comes with it. 

Venus exalted. A harmonic and balanced attunement that is at ease, regardless of the situation. The lack 
of pressure in times of stillness. These people can be so free of pressure when they are still that they will 
never provide their focus for anything or anyone. Like all sixth lines, they are looking for the capacity for 
that focus to have the right detail, that detail to have the right pattern, the pattern to have the right rhythm, 
the rhythm to have the right role and the role to have the right influence. That is the nature of the circuit. 

They are looking to see if the whole thing is possible. "If I focus on the right details, the details come into 
my life and I focus on them, will all of that circuit be fulfilled?" They do not often commit themselves. 
The other thing that is very interesting here is that this line has Neptune in detriment and these people are 
alive in the world. Not long ago, in the 70's, Neptune was in the beginning of Sagittarius moving through 
the 9th gate and 5th gate, which follows in this pattern. Thus we have a great many Neptunian people in 
the world. 

Neptune in detriment. Delusion... (Neptune always offers a spiritual opportunity. When you read this line, 
please think of the spiritual movements and the gurus of the 20th century.) ...as a substitute for genuine 
tranquility. Given the positive nature of this position, the delusion may be just as effective as the "real 
thing. "TM: the illusion is just a good as the real thing. When you see that, you really understand that 
there is a very powerful transition movement alive in the world today that wants us to be able to transcend 
mundane logic and get us to a higher logic, that is, to get to the logic that is inherent in the hierarchy 
itself, to see the pattern. So the focus and concentration of the great scientific movements of our time are 
rooted in exploring the genetic code and the universe, to get all of the detail and to be able to bring it into 

perspective. This illusion on the other side. Again, very difficult for these people to commit themselves to 
be able to find something that really is a detail worth concentrating on, for the reason that they need to 
feel somehow that it is possible that all of that can come to fruition and finally be able to manifest in the 
world. 

Where the pacification of the energy is extreme, pressure, real or imagined, does not disturb the stillness. 
There is so much pressure to be still that these people can live out the Buddha state and never know 
anything about the nature of Buddha consciousness. In other words, they can just be there and the 
delusion that there are in the Buddha state is just as good. This is why we are open to virtual reality. We 
all know that it is not real. We can delude ourselves in that. Delusion is a way of life. By the way, the 
delusion in the 16.1 is a theme of our time. So we are dealing with delusion as a very important element 
in our lives. Delusion and illusion. In this peacefulness of the 52.6, we see clearly that for the logical 
being, for the logical process, there is only one thing that they want and that is peace. 

When you get to the manifestation of the identity of the logical being and you get to the 31 st gate, to the 
gate of Influence, ultimately what the leader says is, "Follow me. I will bring you peace and maintain 
peace." This is what it is all about. If you look at any society today, this is what you find: people who 
want to maintain the peace. We have always seen that this is a key to the logical process. There is no 
ability for all of us to share collectively unless there is peace. 

The peacefulness in the format, in this sixth line, is what the magic of the logical process can be. If we 
really figure out the pattern, if we really figure out logically what the formula is, maybe, just maybe, we 
can all live in peace together. That may be my illusion or delusion about the nature of the Human Design 
System. I do not separate myself from the energy of its time but it seems clear to me that part of our work 
is that, when we come to a point of understanding the basic mechanic of things, that we are no longer 
ignorant of our nature or the nature of the world, it will at least lessen the burden of life on us and we 
bring a much deeper peacefulness to our being. 

HEXAGRAM 53 DEVELOPMENT 

We will look here at one of the collective format pressures, the abstract pressure in the 53rd gate. The 
thing to recognize about the experiential way, about the abstract way, as in the 41, we are dealing with an 
evolutionary process that is exclusively human. When we get over here to the format, it is something that 
influences every aspect of life. The channel 42/53 is called Maturation. One of the absolute laws so far in 
the universe is that everything that begins, ends. Everything that is going through a process, whether we 
want to see this as linear or cyclical, is what we call maturation: the step by step of going through 
something from beginning to end. This is life itself for all of us. It is punctuated by birth and death and 
there is nothing we can do to escape that. This is the maturation process. 

The 53rd gate, Development, is the gate of beginnings. I often tell people that one of the nicest images to 
keep in mind about the 53rd gate is that this format not only belongs to humans but to all mammals. If 
you look at this gate in a mammal, it is the gate of freedom. Don't chain these creatures up. Don't fence 
them in because this gate of beginnings is the gate of freedom to begin an experience. Without that 
freedom, there is no evolutionary progress. 

This need for freedom is deep inside of us. Its energy is cyclical and it is the pressure to complete. It is the 
gate of beginnings but the pressure is, "let's not just start it, let's go all the way and complete it so that we 
can mature in this process." Its fuel quality is active. It is full of stress. If you look at the root center, you 
can see that it is the adrenaline system, biologically. This is a stress hormone. If you look at all nine gates, 
there is only one where the word stress is there in its fuel dynamic. This is the most stressful of all gates. 

Anyone who carries the 53rd gate and who can't begin something new is loaded with stress energy. These 
are the kind of people that get into a job and then they want to get out and want to do something new. If 
they can't get out to get something new, they build up enormous stress inside of them because they need 
to be free, like a dog that cannot be chained. If you chain them and don't allow them to begin something 
new, they become depressed. 

Remember that each of these pressure gates out of the root center that are format pressures can all lead to 
depression. The depression here is when there is no freedom to begin a process so that one can complete 
it. The stress is there until the completion is there. 

Above the lines it says: Development as a structured progression that is both steadfast and enduring. 
Everything that we know about the abstract process is how difficult it is for the abstract being to actually 
go through a process from beginning to end. 

53.1 Accumulation 

The essence of this hexagram is Accumulation. Every beginning comes after something is completed. 
What usually happens is that you have two kinds of new beginnings. You have the new beginning after 
something has been completed-that is a maturation process, that is progression-and you have new things 
that begin after you stepped out of something before it is finished. That will always lead to difficulties 
because the resource, that maturation process, is not being fulfilled. The first line Accumulation, speaks 
specifically of this. 

Neptune exalted. The dissolution of old forms, but not at the expense of valued components that will be 
retained and transformed. You can see that very clearly in the white book: The pressure to begin 
something new, not from scratch but based on the foundation of the old. This is the essence of 
development. The essence of development is that if you can start something and finish it, the next thing 
you start will even have greater power to be able to go through that process of completion. That leads to 

the ability to go through the experiential path and truly be of value to humanity by going through that 
experience from beginning to middle to end, so that we can understand the nature of that experience later. 
It can be made sense of. It can be shared with us. 

Venus in detriment. Development hampered by criticism and the tendency to withdraw rather than make 
use of these experiences. You get yourself a job and instead of going through the process of really 
finishing what you started, you jump out in the middle. You will be followed by an aura and a wave of 
criticism and you carry that with you to the next job. Because you are carrying that energy with you, you 
are beginning again you are back to square one because you have not developed out of that process. This 
is the essence of what this hexagram is all about. The essence is: are you mature, or immature? The 
maturity lies in beginning and completing. The immaturity lies in beginning and jumping out, beginning 
and jumping out. The whole abstract field is made up of this dichotomy. 

So many people who work with Human Design overlook the obvious. This first line carries with it an 
obvious mystery. If you have a line that begins with a Neptunian exaltation and you take a look where this 
gate and its harmonic gate are in the wheel, you can see that Neptune has not been there for about 100 
years, Neptune being an outer planet that has a cycle of 165 year. There is nobody alive in the world that 
carries this vibration. Probably some people who may have lived until their 90's carried it. It is very 
important to understand that this is not active in the world. The only thing that is active in the world is the 
other side. We live in a great age of jumping in and out. The foundation is only operating out of one side. 
Please remember, if you are looking at any line that carries Pluto, Neptune or Uranus, the chances are that 
it is not active. It may be active in people who are very old. Or it may be gone entirely. 

With Pluto and Neptune, we have long periods of time where the fixing of a line does not exist. This 
aspect at the beginning is not there. You will not find it in anybody's chart. It is not alive in the world. 
This is interesting to think about. We live with the consequences of only having a first line that is ruled in 
our times by the detriment which means that we are here to jump in and out. That is the experience now. 

53.2 Momentum 

All second lines are projecting outwards. What this line is projecting outwards is the capacity to begin. It 
always looks like these people can begin something new, which may or may not be appreciated by those 
around them. If you have a partner that has the 53.2, it may look like your partner is always ready to start 
a new relationship. That is simply because they are projecting out that they are ready for something to 
begin. That does not mean that that is so. That is only the field that is being projected out. 

This line is called Momentum. Success breeds success. Moon exalted. The protection of early success 
nurtures further achievement. This is the great line of the paper tiger. You are projecting out that you can 
really begin something and therefore you get that opportunity. If you fulfill that, if you can really do it, it 
will be very easy for you to begin something again. In other words, in this whole process of maturation, if 
you can actually do it and get through it, then you can do it the next time; it gets easier and better. 

Mars in detriment. A tendency with early success to haste and imprudent action. Both sides are being 
conditioned by 'if.' There is no guarantee that the projection outwards that one is capable of beginning 
will allow one to really begin. You may not have what it takes. It is not about what it takes in the line. It 
has to do with design; it has to do with the individual and what their particular design is, whether or not 
they can do anything with that, or who is in their life and the connection to it. 

In the white book, the lunar side: The pressure to start something new based on past success. That past 
success is the projection outwards that you can begin and if you can really do it, that becomes your 
success. "I did it. I really got in there. I really could do it." This provides a great deal of strength. 

On the other side: The pressure based on success is to be impatient for something new. What happens to 
these people is that because they have early success, they think that they will always be able to have early 
success. Remember that they are a second line. That does not mean that that is true. They may be lucky 
the first time and after that, they try it 50 more times and it does not work. So it is something to be very 
clear about in terms of this Momentum. Everything about the nature of this gate is about being so clear 
that, yes, it is about initiating experience but it is about initiating an experience that can be fulfilled in 
order to have the strength to initiate a new experience. It is a cycle that is being built up and it is always 
there as a theme. 

53.3 Practicality 

The third line, the end of the lower trigram, deals with the theme of trial and error. Trial and error is very 
much in harmony with the whole process of maturation because maturation is basically a trial and error 
process, going through one cycle and the next, and learning from your experiences. 

It is called Practicality. Moon exalted. In its most natural position, the concentration on avoiding conflict 
to ensure protection and continued development. Avoiding conflict works in two ways: these are people 
that will only begin things when they have harmonic relationships with others. This is a collective stream. 
And these are people who will leave and walk out on things because it is not harmonic, in order to start 
something new and to get away from the conflict. These are the kind of people that, when they are in 
something, the moment that there is any kind of tension or conflict pointed towards them or in the 
environment around them, they want to get out. So they are driven (the Moon which drives us), they are 
moved to try to find the right kind of collective force to work with. First to third lines don't know 
anything about the other side. It is always a surprise. It is always trial and error. It is always full of so- 
called mistakes. 

In the white book: The pressure to eliminate conflict in order to develop. This means that these people 
cannot be mature unless they have harmony. This is very important to understand. You have a child with 
the 53.3 and you have to recognize right away, that they will not develop unless they are in a harmonious 
relationship and unless there is harmony in their environment. Otherwise they will not develop properly. 
It is a very important theme for these people. The development is about human evolution and the 
maturation process within the human way. So you can have a lot of disturbed people. Remember, these 
format gates carry with them deep depression. This is always a possibility in these gates. It is very 
important for these children to have harmony around them. When they say that they don't like school 
because they don't like the fact that there are a lot of people who are fighting and they are uncomfortable 
with it, you get them out and put them some place else where they can find harmony because without 
harmony they will not develop. 

On the other side of this, Mars in detriment. The unconscious provoking of conflict that logically 
threatens security and development. In the white book: Energy which provokes conflict and threatens 
development. This process with Mars is that because it is trial and error, these people can be very 
provocative. They are ready to begin something but it is just as likely that it is a bond that they will break. 
The third lines always have to deal with the conflict theme of others. The exalted has to find a way out of 
it and the detriment provokes it. One of the things that you find about 53.3's is that they have a genetic 
strategy in life which is that, whenever they have enough of anything, they instantly provoke conflict and 
it gives them a rationale to leave, and they walk out to start something new. 

53.4 Assuredness 

Fourth line, upper trigram. Here we are dealing with being unidirectional. We have the theme of 
externalization. There is the recognition that there is something else on the other side of the channel. This 
is in a collective channel and therefore it is inherently social to begin with. That inherently social nature 
of this channel is the format of the abstract process. You also have to see that this is the format of crisis 
and of belief systems. This is the format of all of the abstract processes. Conflicts in dealings with others 
are going to be inherent in it. 

The fourth line, Assuredness is: The ability to maintain the strength of one's individuality in complex and 
often awkward situations that ensure continued security and development. You notice that 'security', 
'development' and 'protection', these terms are all around this. For the abstract being, their cycle is their 
well-being. If they cannot go through the cycle, they become unhealthy. They must go through the cycle. 
This is their well-being. 

In the white book: The pressure to maintain one's individuality in confused beginnings. All beginnings are 
confused. There is no way of knowing where the beginning will lead to. That is the process. That is the 
mystery. It all begins with its level of confusion. This is the gift here, to be able to be all right in that. It is 
your beginning. It doesn't matter. It is all confused around you. You have that capacity. 

The other side, the Venus in detriment: The persistent difficulty with embarrassing or awkward situations 
where normal emotional reactions may prove detrimental. In the white book: Individual pressure for 
beginnings that creates awkward and sometimes embarrassing situations. Think about what that is like 
when somebody is one- tracked when it has to do with beginnings. They have to start something new. 
This can be very uncomfortable and can create all kinds of embarrassing situations. You are in the middle 
of a dinner and you have guests and all of a sudden you have to start a new chapter in the story that you 
are writing and you just get up and walk away. Everybody is waiting for dinner to come and you are off. 
You have gone and are into your thing. You have to start it but it can lead to embarrassing situations. 

The gift here is the Assuredness. When the guests comes sporting into the room and ask what is going on, 
there is the assuredness to say, "I had to start this. Sorry." This is the one-tracked need to begin. These 
people are very fixed on it. If you see anybody with the 53.4, the one thing for them to recognize is that, 
because it is about the abstract process which is deeply related to the emotional system, they have to be 
very careful in making commitments in relationships. This is a one-tracked mind about beginning things. 
The moment that anything will go wrong in the relationship, that onetracked mind will start something 
new. Be very careful about the nature of your commitments because if you are carrying this kind of 
energy, there is this deep drive inside of you to start something new. That can be a new relationship or a 
new job. You have to be clear about the authority within yourself that is making a decision to commit 
yourself to something in order that the energy to be healthy. This is true for the whole gate, but 
specifically for the fourth line. 

53.5 Assertion 

As I pointed out to you, the first and the fifth line are unusual due to the aspect that they both have 
Neptunian exaltation. In both cases, this exaltation is not functioning because we don't have Neptune 
around in anybody alive. Actually, that is probably not true because there are a couple of people around 
who are over 115 years old. There may be a couple of people that are actually carrying that vibration. 
There is a guy in Lebanon who is 135 years old. He must have it. There may be a couple of remnants in 
the world, but what this is saying is much greater for us. Please remember that it is a format energy of our 
evolutionary process. 

The fifth line, Assertion, has a very beautiful Neptunian exaltation. It says: The underlying and often 
psychic recognition of the intrinsic values of development that even in periods of isolation has the 

assertiveness to maintain direction. Its very power garners continued support even from those who are 
basically opposed. That is very lovely but it does not exist in the world. It will be wonderful when 
Neptune comes there in the next century and brings back this quality to the experiential way. 

The other thing is that in this assertion, the way in which the fifth line is projected upon is the Earth in 
detriment, and not on: The pressure to recognize the value of development and the energy for beginnings, 
regardless of circumstances. What we live with in the world is: Where the energy for beginnings attracts 
the very forces that can abort them. This is a time of the survival of the fittest. You stand up and say, "I 
think it is this," and somebody immediately says, "No. I think it is that." This is what we have today and 
what we had for a long time now as the way in which development is projected upon. Think about what 
that has done to our civilization in this era. 

In the black book: Earth in detriment. An over-assertiveness that, rather than applied to maintaining 
support in the face of opposition and isolation, may actually strengthen the opposing forces by its attitude. 
This is what we have in the world. This attitude of "I am beginning this and this is the way," and 
somebody opposes. We immediately have a struggle here, and it is the Earth. This is grounding us now. It 
is the way it is supposed to be now. In the global cycle course that I teach, I talk about the longer-term 
trends that are there for us. This is a time of great genetic diversity. We have been living in an era of great 
genetic diversity in which we mix the genetic pools across the planet. V% are having an intellectual 
diversity that we have never had before. This not being fixed on one way, constantly breaking, jumping in 
and out, this is the part of the consciousness of the total field now because this is a format energy and they 
are so important. 

Please understand that the way we experience abstract people today is not the way they really are. 
Abstract people get a bad press in this time because the fact of the matter is that these two Neptunian 
aspects that are veiled are not there. They create an imbalance. 

The channel 42/53 says: A design of balanced development. We are in an imbalanced time. We are off- 
kilter. We are out of balance on purpose. After all, that is the plan. This is time for us to be out of balance, 
so it is very important to see that, as we move into the next Neptunian cycle that affects this, we will 
come back into a time balance and thus, those people who work in Human Design in the next century will 
have a totally different way of looking at, for example, the nature of the abstract experience because there 
is a different foundation. There will be a balanced foundation and there will be balanced way in which it 
is projected upon from the outside. 

Format energies have enormous influence. You can be somebody who is totally individual in your design, 
and you have the 53rd gate. This gate rules you because it is a format energy. It will insist on that format 
being followed and, instead of you pulsing along the way you should, your individuality works in cycles. 
This is: you are not individual, you are very individual and it ends. It does not follow the normal format. 

Formats have enormous power, so here in this format is our evolutionary way. We are in an experiential 
way that is out of balance now. That is not a matter of good or bad. That is just mechanically-speaking. 
We are on this side only. If individuals have the logic format, they get very fixed on their habits. They get 
fixed on repeating something as an individual. Often that is very artistic: the individual expression loaded 
with the capacity to repeat and focus. Thus you have a lot of composers or painters. A lot of creativity 
comes out of that because there is the discipline in the focus to stay with an individual process. The 
format dictates the way in which the frequency will work. It will not block the individuality. 

53.6 Phasing 

When you look at the sixth line, you see Pluto in detriment which means that we will not experience that 
either. It does not exist. The 'Department of Planning' always does a good job. You can look at the nature 
of this hexagram as a format energy to start the experiential way and you see that Neptune is suddenly 
there. It takes always the exalted in the first and fifth line that turns this beginning process into something 
that is designed to jump in and out. When you get to the sixth line, the line of transition, it says, "How can 
I get through the whole process?" Remember that this is what a sixth line truly wants to see: "I begin, and 
not only do I complete it, I go through the whole thing. I get the fantasy, the feeling, the crisis, the 
change. I get the philosophy from it. I get the experience and share it in being the prodigal." The sixth line 
in this format is not ready to make any kind of commitment until it really can see that it can complete 
things, despite Neptune in the first and fifth line. 

You can see that Pluto is: The pressure to hide beginnings in fear of losing past support. The one thing we 
don't need at this time is somebody who can actually complete things and hides that because everybody 
else is jumping in and out. We need those examples. If you look at the 10.6, The Role model, you are 
looking at this sixth line where there is the need to fulfill this. 

With the Moon exalted, it is: The energy to attract support for beginnings based on the success of the past. 
Only very few of these people who carry the sixth line will begin anything. All they see around them is 
beginning and jumping out. If they are fortunate enough in their own design to have this sixth line and 
they are able to begin and complete something, then they have enormous power. Not only can things be 
begun and completed but that, by its very nature, attracts all these people. Just because Neptune has not 
activated those two parts in our time does not mean that this collective field does not want to be mature. It 
does. It is the mechanics that is affecting the maturity. The sixth line is saying, "Yes, we can do it. If I can 
do that, you will be attracted to me and if you are attracted to me, we can do it together." 

Of course, because the theme is so strongly in the jumping in and out, it is not easy for these people to 
have that ability to go through, nor is it easy for them to meet the others that will allow them to see that it 
is possible to begin and end something with them. Remember that there is no 42 here. There is just the 53 
saying, "Yes, I can begin things, but can it really be completed?" 

In the black book: Moon exalted. The successful utilization of the completion of a stage in development, 
that by its evident success and value can be used as an example to attract support for the next stage. This 
remains a very important aspect and the 'Department of Planning', the gods, is very kind because they 
make sure that that mutative possibility, the transitional possibility of this sixth line, is only focused in 
one direction. It is placed in the direction of really attracting others to complete processes and really be 
mature. It has taken away what would have added to the strength of the Neptunian side not being there. It 
takes away the natural collective sociability of the people who have this gift to share and offer it and turns 
them into secretive forces. If you look at the history of the world and how it moves, you will see if you 
look at the Plutonic movement to this line, times in which so many things were deeply kept secret. 

You can see that the theme in the third line is conflict. It is about learning about people. If the sixth line 
has learned its lesson about the others, it will find the right support from others despite the other energies 
that are at work, where maturation can still take place. 

HEXAGRAM 54 THE MARRYING MAIDEN 

The 54th hexagram is both the most mundane of all the fuels which come out of the root and the most un- 
mundane. There is no real word for that un-mundane. The vast majority of people that possess this gate, 
their fuel is necessary to be able to bring out success within the tribe. We know that the 54th gate is called 
the Marrying Maiden. If you turn the number around, you get the 45 and you get to where the Marrying 
Maiden wants to be, which is to be the queen in the 45th gate. 

The Marrying Maiden is the gate of drive. This is a very powerful fuel. It is the drive to succeed because 
on the other side is the fear of failure. It is the drive to succeed on the material plane because its natural 
path is to the 21/45. It is the drive to live in a material community. That is a communal material 
community in which you have shops, and clients who become your family customers. The 54th gate is the 
drive to transform or not and in this transform-or-not is the magic that will come across in the fourth line. 

Within the 54 always lies this possibility of transformation. Remember that the gate at the other end is not 
only the gate of failure but the most conservative of all gates. It is quite something to transform that 
conservativeness. This is a very powerful field. Its energy mechanic is about liquid production. That is not 
to sound obscure. It gives us a deep insight into the nature of this gate because it is fuelling instinct. 
Instinct is rooted in the deepest of memories. Memory is stored in the liquid of the cells. Here, this liquid 
production is the 54, the beginning of memory storage. The 54 has a lovely gift. It only remembers 
winning and succeeding, instinctively, that is. The 32 at the other end will always remember failure. That 
is the balance. 

At the top of the lines it says: Interaction in its most mundane social context, but also one's mystical and 
cosmic relationships. Built in here, in the most mundane, can be the most exalted spiritual experience. 

On the other side, in the 19/49, we have the mystical channel of the tribe. Here, in the mirror on the 
splenic side, we have this incredible potential. I had a lot of dealings with sannyasins. One of the things 
that I like most of all about the nature of the sannyasins through Osho was his recognition of the 
importance of the material in our lives, this recognition that you must go out into the world and you must 
triumph on the mundane plane in order to live out true spirituality. It is very easy to be enlightened when 
you sit on the mountain and nobody sees you. It is another thing to be enlightened and having to work in 
the super-market. This is a very different story and if you can do it there, that is the real thing. Thus, lying 
within this truly mundane gate is a recognition that what is truly mundane is the only spiritual way. You 
must live your awareness in your life moment by moment, breath by breath. 

The fact that this stream about the tribal process has an individual nature should not mask that this is 
tribal and communal. It is about the nature of support. It is very important to understand that because this 
gate is deeply misunderstood. What the nature of this drive and ambition is all about is misunderstood. 

54.1 Influence 

This first line is called Influence. It is a strange line if you do not really understand what this gate is all 
about. The line says: The ability to achieve influence through secret relationships, anywhere from the 
private adviser to the Satanist. In the white book: Ambition energized through secret relationships which 
fuel influence. Think about what this really means. If you really want to rise up, you can not just call out 
and say, "I want to rise up," because there is no way to go. When a 54.1 says, "I can help you rise up," 
then they get power because of their fuel, their ability to be the adviser, to be the secret one behind the 
mass. They say to others, "Do this. Do that." In doing that, as the other rises up, they rise with them. As 
they rise with them, slowly they gain power over the very one that they have been helping to transform. 

Understand the nature of this 54th gate. The moment that the ambition is for oneself, there is no influence. 
The ambition has to be pointed towards the other. "Let me help you. Let me work for you. I really think 
what you are doing is great. Let me help you out." In that, they gain power. 

Venus in detriment. A socially misguided insistence on formal recognition of a relationship that in terms 
of influence will diminish its power. "I want everybody to know that it was my idea, and not yours." 
Power over. It is gone. If you don't tell anybody, they will eventually figure it out anyway. "It wasn't 
really him, it was her." That is the power that is inherent here. Ambition which demands formal 
recognition, limiting influence. The basis of ambition is for the community to succeed. The individual can 
rise up by helping somebody else and they themselves will gain the influence and eventually rise up. 

54.2 Discretion 

When we come to the second line, you can see how different a second line can be from a first line. The 
first line is introspective and it is looking at its foundation. It is looking inward to see how one can truly 
rise up. It is looking inward to see how we can help somebody else rise up in order to take advantage of 
that. When you get to the second line, you simply project outwards that you will be discrete. Look at these 
first three lines, they really tell you so much about ambition. Keep everything secret. Keep everything 
quiet and closed in. This line is called Discretion. Covert interaction is about not showing it. Don't let 
them see how ambitious you really are. So, here you have discretion. The energy that these people are 
projecting outwards is that they will not tell anybody. Of course, that may or may not be true. 

Saturn exalted. The wisdom, once a relationship gets formally recognized, to restrain the temptation to 
take advantage of past informal interactions. "Yes, your friend is made assistant vice president. But you 
are not going to remind him in public that in his last job, he was a mess and he covered out so-and-so very 
nicely." You restrain yourself from letting that out so that you can hold on to your power. Otherwise, your 
ambition will fail. The moment that you are not discrete, you can lose the advantage that you have gained. 
The energy of restraint fuels ambition. 

The detriment is Mars. It means immaturity. Recognition, in the formal sense, seen as a license to take 
advantage of informal knowledge. A lack of loyalty. Here is somebody who said, "Okay, now that I have 
it formally recognized and everybody knows that it was my idea, I can blow this turkey off and take their 
place. While we are sitting in this meeting, I will let everybody else know what kind of a fool this person 
is." 

Lack of loyalty. I make that sound terrible. Don't believe for a moment that we do not need lack of 
loyalty, like anything else. It is so important to understand that. The person who generated that concept, 
who was of value to the community and did that informally and gets recognized for it, they feel all right. 
"I get recognized for it. Why shouldn't I go on to the next stage, because I have the skills for that?" After 
all, this gate is called Ambition. It is others who may consider that a lack of loyalty. This is a projected 
field. This is the whole thing to understand about this in order that you don't get stuck in these things that 
we have prejudices about. You can see how they work. This is simply mechanical and we have two sides 
to this mechanic. 

54.3 Covert interaction 

Third lines. Bonds made and broken as its frequency. Trial and error as a theme. Here you have the title 
of Covert interaction. 

Pluto exalted. The ability, when stymied in formal relationships, to use secret or purely informal channels 
when it is the only resort. Think about how this works. All of these first three lines carry with them 

basically the same theme. How this works is that you have somebody that is, for example, working in the 
military, and they got to a certain rank and then they can't get any further. They get no more formal 
recognition that they should go higher up in that military order. Because they keep on trying to move the 
ladder further up and they keep on getting denied, what they do then is that they get involved in covert 
interaction, in their ambition to find a way to subvert that order. Usually we call that a coup d'etat, and all 
of a sudden you have a country that is being run by Sergeant Dow. It is not General Dow, not Colonel or 
Lieutenant Dow, but Sergeant Dow. Remember that it is conditional and only when they are stymied. It 
does not mean that they will be stymied all the time. In other words, these people will only use covert 
interaction when blocked. 

The drive when blocked to use secret means to fuel ambition. Most of the time, with the force these 
people have, they don't get blocked but because it is trial and error, there will be these bonds that are 
broken in these relationships and it will be necessary to find some other way to get around them in order 
to continue one's process. 

Venus in detriment. The insistence that formal channels, no matter how frustrating, can be overcome by 
the power of attraction. This, again, goes back to the same thing. This means, using the same military 
analogy, that even though they get stymied over and over and over again in trying to get the promotion, 
they will try to make themselves indispensable to the local general. They keep on offering their services, 
they keep on getting involved, they build up an informal relationship hoping that their very attraction and 
their very ability to integrate with that person will end up with them finally getting the next step up the 
ladder, that they think or believe they deserve. 

The energy of ambition when blocked will fuel the power of attraction to overcome the obstacle. If you 
can't to do it formally, you find some way to ingratiate yourself with the one in charge so that they will 
accept you at another level, and hopefully that will lead to your ambition being fulfilled. You can see 
clearly here that we are dealing with a communal supportive process in which the rising up is conditioned 
on somebody being there to help that process: somebody who gets empowered by these people, 
somebody who is fueled in their ambition in order that the others' ambition can be realized in the lifetime. 
It is very powerful. Something to always see in a reading with somebody who has this 54th gate is for 
them to understand that their greatest success will come by first making somebody else successful. 

Ultimately, they will get the rewards and the recognition for that energy but it has to be seen second hand. 
It has to come from others recognizing it, by seeing it, and in its apparent selflessness. "I did it so that this 
person could make it." They end up being seen as the ones that should be transformed and promoted and 
moved up the ladder. They are company people and work for the program. They are not just interested in 
themselves, and they are so pleased when they finally sit in the chairman's seat and they run the 
organization. The fairy tale associated with this gate is Cinderella. Often, these people have a smell of 
who they can bribe. They know by instinct with whom covert interactions are possible. They properly 
smell it, but as a third line, they also make mistakes and learn from them. 

54.4 Enlightenment/Endarkenment 

When you come to this fourth line, it is the only line that is intrinsically different from the traditional 
I'Ching. That is, in its pure nature obviously there is no description. At the time of the discovery of 
Uranus, that was when the 54.4 went through its transformation, so we are dealing with something that is 
just a couple of hundred years old. One of the ways to look at this fourth line is to recognize something 
about the nature of what we have been looking at in terms of how ambition actually functions. The 
Marrying Maiden, this ability to rise up, to have this drive and ambition, is always conditioned by a 
decline of drive and ambition of others, in order for them to rise up. In the externalization of that line lies 

perhaps the ability to see that one is doing in the world what one would like the world to do for oneself. 
Do for the totality what you hope the totality will do for you. 

There is this need to recognize that Enlightenment/Endarkenment is not about achieving that for oneself. 
If one tries to achieve that for others, that is how one finds it. So we have a world filled with priests trying 
to lead others to the spiritual door so that they can find it. Built into this fourth line is this recognition that 
enlightenment, or whatever these terms mean, this deep spiritual process, is not about ourselves. It is not 
our enlightenment or endarkenment. This comes elsewhere. This is about what is possible for the totality 
because anyone who has this line cannot benefit from it unless they are benefiting from whoever can get it 
through them. 

If you are a 54.4 and you do somebody's reading, it is more likely that the reading will have a greater 
impact on you than it has on them because that is the way that will operate. Depending on the person and 
the situation, you are obviously going to deal with that on a different level. But it is so important to 
understand that at the core of communal or tribal spirituality is this recognition that there is no reward 
unless you are serving others, and we have a lot of that in our tribal religion. We have all kinds of people 
such as missionaries who dedicated themselves to being of service in order to find it themselves. 

54.5 Magnanimity 

We know that the fourth and fifth lines have the capacity to deal with the other side. They are equipped 
for it. You notice that both of them are singularities. There is no polarity in these lines. They are very 
specific. When you get to the fifth line, you know that it is being projected on. So, what we have already 
learned in the first line about the nature of ambition is that it works best behind the throne. When you get 
to the fifth line, everybody assumes that the 54.5 is the power behind the throne. They are always given 
that assumption, even if it is not true. "They are the ones that are really in charge," people say, even if it is 
not true. Everybody projects on them that they really are the ones in charge. That is why it is called 
Magnanimity. The way everybody else sees the 54.5 is, "Isn't that nice. They are willing to help me. How 
magnanimous of them," without the deep recognition that by allowing them to help you, they will go 
beyond you. They will use you as a way to move up the ladder. When I say 'use you,' I don't mean that in 
the negative sense. 

Here in Magnanimity, the Sun is exalted. The natural authority and actualizing spirit, that in a position of 
power can have genuine and fruitful relationships with the less advantaged (as long as they are in service 
and make no demands). That is, if it is not a position of power, it cannot have fruitful relationships. 

In the white book: The energy for actualizing that despite this power fuels fruitful relationships with 
others. Due to the fact that this person is always projected on to be the power behind the throne, it does 
not matter what job they have. As long as they are recognized for their power and everybody treats them 
accordingly, they will continue to give their energy to the people around them who need that energy to 
keep on succeeding. If they are not given the respect of that power, then all kinds of problems can come 
out of this because for them it is absolutely essential. They cannot be magnanimous unless they have 
people around them that are going to respect them and recognize their real power. It is essential for them. 
As long as that real power is recognized, it is okay. 

If you are the power behind the throne and the king treats you like a god, everything is great. You don't 
have to be king and you can have a good time with the king who is lesser than you are. And you can have 
a good time with all those people down there you don't want to deal with because you get that 
recognition. But if the king treats you like a servant and you have made the king, this will not work. The 
54.5 is given a great advantage. It is assumed that they will be the source of power. It is assumed that they 

are the ones that can help bring about success. Therefore, they will get their opportunities, like all fifth 
lines. 

54.6 Selectivity 

All sixth lines are looking at the nature of the circuit. If you are the Marrying Maiden, and you are 
looking at the whole circuit and you are a sixth line, you are looking at the 45 which says, "I am the queen 
or the king, and I have." For any communal sixth line, particularly in the 54.6, the only ambition worth 
fuelling is an ambition that is going to take them to that place where they are going to be the ruler, and 
they are going to have that because that is the completion of what this is all about: in doing that and in 
getting to that place, and being fulfilled in that. 

This line is called Selectivity, and it is about people. After all, we are dealing with community and 
support. Saturn exalted. The ingrained responsibility, in terms of maintaining security and personal 
identity, that will naturally restrict its relationships to ones that are mutually beneficial This is very clear. 
The energy to restrict relationships that hinder ambition. Just because there is somebody that can help, 
who may be able to get me to here or there does not mean that I will, unless it is mutually beneficial and it 
is a relationship that is really of value to me that I can enjoy it, and that it is a person that I can work with. 
This becomes a key at that level. 

On the other side, Jupiter in detriment. A generally benefit and expansive nature that assumes that it can 
instill what is otherwise missing in its partners. A waste of energy. In the white book: A waste of energy 
in maintaining relationships which hinder ambition. Let's say, that you have a politician that is running for 
political office and you have somebody who has the Saturn side. As long as this person is somebody they 
can work with, as long as it is mutually beneficial, they will get involved in supporting this person but 
only if they know that if that person gets elected, they are going to get some kind of cushy government 
job that will pay them a lot in whatever form on the material plane. The Jupiterian side will look at the 
politician and will think, "Oh my god. This one will not win but this one has told me that I will get this 
cushy job, if they do win. So I will do the very" best that I can to give them the ambition, the tools and the 
fuel that they need because I can change them, transform them, so that they can be a winner." A waste of 
energy. That is on the other side. 

Remember that we are dealing with a communal sixth line. Communal sixth lines are much more ready to 
make a commitment than any other of the sixth lines due to the nature of the tribe and community. The 
thing to recognize about the power inherent in this is that these people really do have a way of climbing 
the ladder, but it is specifically about whether or not they can grasp and understand the nature of people. 
This is the most important gift to somebody who has the 54th gate. They have to understand the nature of 
humans and how they work. This going underneath the secret, the covert, to go deep inside to understand 
the mechanism of people: What turns them on? What moves them, and what doesn't? What drives them? 
Because in the end, the great success that is possible only comes as communal success, because this is a 
tribal stream. It only comes by having those right forces. 

If you are a 54 and you are carrying all this power inside of you to bring about transformation, and the 
person that offers you that opportunity or the person you connect to does not have what it takes, you will 
not rise up because they don't rise up. The third line learns this right away. It makes all kinds of mistakes 
about who it gets involved with. The sixth line, in its wisdom, says, "I know exactly what kind of person 
should be there." The Saturn restricts everything else but that type. The Jupiter says, "I know what type it 
has to be, and I'll turn this person into that type." It does not work. When I say that it does not work, that 
does not work generally. It does not mean that it won't work at all. There are many cases in which the 
politician has been groomed in that sense. Somebody who really did not have it is groomed by somebody 
else, so that they really look like they have it. 

The general sense of how it operates in the world is that it tends to be what it is for most sixth lines. They 
simply withdraw that part of them. When you meet a 54.6, you are not likely to meet somebody who 
obviously is ambitious. They hold back from ambition until they see the opportunity where they can rise 
up: either if the person is exactly the right person or because they think, out of the Jupiterian aspect, that 
they can transform that person and make it the right person. 

HEXAGRAM 55 ABUNDANCE 

This 55th gate in the channel of Emoting, a design of moodiness, is of enormous importance to humanity. 
It is in the 55.6 that the nature of emotional spirit will begin to awaken as a genetic evolutionary pattern, 
and so the nature of the 55th hexagram is important to us at that level. But please remember that on the 
mundane plane, it is the most unstable of all the emotional gates. It is the most volatile of all the 
emotional gates. It has the highest wave going up and the lowest wave going down of all the emotional 
gates. Though it represents a mystery (I call it the Sleeping Phoenix that will awaken and bring with it the 
fire of the Aquarian age.), the reality is that it represents now this enormous instability in the movement 
of the wave. This is the glass that is always half full and half empty, going through its wave process, and 
we take a look at the different lines in this context. 

Here, the gate of spirit: The potential is the awareness of provocation or not. Am I being provoked or not? 
Do I like it? tTJT 40 drsnesi-poteittict n~ $ ec t. This is one of the things to recognize about the nature of 
the 55th gate. Any time that you see anybody that has this gate, please understand how important it is to 
tell them, "Do not eat if you are not in the mood 1" It is so important for them because they can become so 
unhealthy. If you have the whole channel defined-(39V55) and you are always in the mood for eating, 
then it is there already. If that energy gets to the sacral or to the throat, there is a way of burning the 
energy. If you are not connected to the sacral or to the throat, there is no way to burn that energy. 

The 55th gate can only eat, make love or work when it is in the mood. Only in the mood can it be social. 
Unless these people with the 55th gate understand that and honor that, they are going to suffer terribly in 
their wave. So the mood becomes the essence of all this. 

What we are looking at as we go through the lines is that these are the lines of moodiness. In general, 
everything having to do with individuality has to do with honoring moods. I don't have any emotional 
definition in individuality but I have the 12th gate and I am very individual and I am deeply moody. 
Every time I step into the emotional wave, moods are very natural to me. It is simply the reality of what it 
is to be individual but it is pinpointed or highlighted here in the 55th gate. 

55.1 Cooperation 

The first line is our foundation line. It is the line of introspection. The first line always represents the 
essence of what the gate is about. Above the lines it says, Abundance is strictly a question of spirit. 
Whether one's glass is half empty or half full. 

It is called Cooperation. Jupiter exalted. The expansion of activity in cooperation with powerful forces 
through principled actions that guarantee continued support and engender prosperity. The nature of spirit 
of the 55.1. Everything about the 55th gate is establishing the spirit that will be necessary to enable the 
individual to be social. It provides the spirit for the gate 22, the gate of Grace, which opens up the 
possibility of being open to social interaction as an individual. The nature of the 55th gate is that, in this 
first line, it is going to find its spirit but only if it is dealing socially with forces that are more powerful 
than it. That is obviously subjective. What it is really saying is that the moment that the 55's bring inferior 
forces into their life, because of the nature of their high/low wave, they can go even lower than the 
inferior forces that are going to impact on them as a conditioning force. 

Whenever I am dealing with a client who has the first line, I am always telling them: it is very important 
that you are looking towards a place to go in your relationships; somebody that knows more than you, 
somebody who has more experience than you do, somebody that has a knowledge that you need, 
whatever the case may be. But something that you need to recognize is that they are of value to you in 

your social process because they are making your cup more full. Inferior forces are going to drain your 
cup. 

Venus in detriment. The concentration on harmonic relationships with powerful forces that provide for 
continuity but not necessarily advancement. This is the ability to be social with these forces but so much 
energy is spent on maintaining the sociability, the wave being the cause of all of that, that they do not 
really get the advantage that comes with the relationship. 

The potential to find the spirit through cooperation with powerful forces. You can see that it is deeply 
conditioned. The spirit is not going to come from inferior forces. It can't. That is the whole thing to 
recognize. The nature of that is that there is only a potential for the spirit in cooperation with powerful 
forces. 

The detriment: The potential to harmonize with powerful forces but not necessarily for the benefit of the 
spirit. Again, because this is all about relationships, a social process, and because it is in the deepest of the 
waves of moods, the moodiness inherent in the relationship can be distracting so that the real progression, 
the real fulfillment of the spirit, cannot take place. 

55.2 Distrust 

Probably the most disliked people can be the 55.2's. The second line is very difficult. This is the 
projection outwards of the emotional spirit, whether it is at its lowest end or at its highest end because 
there is no introspection involved. It projects out blindly because that is the nature of the emotional wave. 
Everything about the 55 is leading to the social process. Don't ever forget that about the nature of it. What 
the second line is being projected on is that that spirit is projected onto others. Individuals are always 
attracting attention and so do the individuals with this line, but they often attract negative attention. 

It is called Distrust. One thing to see about emotional spirit is that it is going beyond this word. Trust is 
just about the motor. My joke about trust: in the English language, there is 'rust' in trust. 

Abundance hampered by slander or gossip. Venus exalted. The gift of being able to penetrate to the center 
that may demonstrate effectively through its relating talents that its trustfulness is genuine. "You can trust 
whatever my spirit is carrying. You can trust that this is really me. I really am happy, even though 
tomorrow I may look very sad. You can really trust that I really am happy. You can really trust that I am 
happy with you, even though tomorrow I may look very sad with you." 

Earth in detriment. The direct challenge to the slanderers who will always have the advantage of quoting 
the Bard: "Methinks he Both protest too much." Only continued example can overcome distrust. 

In the Book of Letters: Emotional stability and strength of spirit is dependant on being trusted by others. 
These people are not introspective. They don't really go through their process of seeing that their cup is 
always half empty/half full. Because they are not aligning themselves with powerful forces, they are not 
nurturing their spirit which is their opportunity to fill their cup. They are just projecting their emotional 
spirit outwards. When they are at the high end, that can be lovely. But they still have people talk behind 
their back. 

The 55.2 is always talked about and not often nicely, and they are often distrusted. They have to 
understand that they can never challenge the distrusters because the more they say, "You can really trust 
me," the more they are distrusted. That is the nature of what that line is about. One of the most powerful 
forces, this projection force, is one of the main images of what moodiness is, which is not nice. People do 

not like it. They do not trust it because it seems to be very uncomfortable, this movement from one end of 
the scale to the other end of the scale. 

55.3 Innocence 

When we get to the third line, we get to a very interesting line. In the 25th hexagram, which is the gate of 
the spirit of the Self (not the emotional spirit), in the third line, we have a line that deals almost 
exclusively with the concept of what we call failure: whether or not the essence of the Self, the spirit of 
the Self, can survive failure. We live in a very nice time because the detriment is Pluto, and none of us are 
going to experience that detriment or the channel being activated by Pluto in our lifetimes. So, it is a time 
in which we can escape the deep pain of failure. That is the 25.3. 

When you come here to 55.3, you are dealing with the same theme. Remember that third lines, because of 
their adaptation, because of the bonds made and broken, because of the wave of allegiance and rejection, 
are always going to have situations where, given whoever has the perspective, the bond being broken can 
seem like a failure. It may not seem like a failure to the breaker of the bond but it may seem like a failure 
to the one who has had the bond broken, or vice versa. But the reality is that failure is always going to be 
a theme in third lines. This is one of the things to recognize. If you are looking for a heart that can fail, 
look at the 21.3. 

The third line of the 55th hexagram is called Innocence. Here "I was only following orders" is a genuine 
defense. Saturn exalted. When the form is correct and attempts at actualization have been disciplined and 
within guidelines, failure cannot be personally attributed. What I say to people who have this line is, "If 
you are in the mood and you do things when you are in the mood, if you fail, that is not your fault. Do not 
blame yourself. You have not lost anything in that." But you have to recognize that it has to be within its 
form. The form here is to honor the nature of the moods. 

When you get to the detriment, you find Mars fixing it. A struggle against conformity or individual 
initiative can bring a superior to ruin, while safely hiding behind his shield. If you look at the detriment in 
the Book of Letters it says: The energy to selfishly protect one's spirit at the expense of others. So you 
come into the office and you come in with your spirit at the high end, and you fill up your boss with that 
spirit so that he is twice as high, and you make all kinds of commitments. Then you go to the low end of 
your spirit and you get it reflected back from your boss, and none of the things you committed yourself to 
do will you do. All you want to do is quit and get out because the cup is half empty and you feel terrible. 
Then the boss gets fired because he had already gone and said, "Here is our projection for next year. W% 
have all these wonderful projects and Mr. Jones back here is really wonderful at this." They end up 
loosing their job. 

The thing to recognize about innocence is that the only way that there is innocence here is when the mood 
is honored, and only then can the spirit survive. The moment that the mood is not honored, all chaos 
breaks out. When the mood is being honored, these people will break bonds. This is natural for them. This 
is honoring their mood. One of the things that happen to these people is that they become very ill, 
emotionally ill, when for example, they are in jobs and they do not quit. They don't break the bond. They 
don't act innocently. They try to compensate for all of that and they just don't walk away, which is what 
their moods dictate to them. 

55.4 Assimilation 

Fourth line, upper trigram, externalization. Remember the resonance to the first line. We saw in the first 
line that the spirit is protected by aligning itself with more powerful forces, and that is the essence for the 
spirit in terms of everything that is coming out of the nature of this gate. When you get to the fourth line, 

it already has incorporated that into its process. That means that it is looking for powerful forces, but it is 
a fourth line and externalization has this quality of being very fixed. 

One of the interesting things about this line is that this line works much better when it is in an undefined 
emotional system because these people are fixed on who feels good and who doesn't. This is what they 
know and, in their relationships, their assimilation, they will be with one person because that person 
makes them feel good and they will not be with somebody else because they don't make them feel good. 
It is very clear to them but they get very fixed in that. They are not very good at dealing with a lot of 
people because this can be confusing for them, but they are very concerned about who is exactly the right 
one. 

The line is called Assimilation. Jupiter exalted. The establishment of a framework that balances principles 
with energy and leads inevitably to expansion and prosperity. Their principle is always clear for them: 
their cup is either half full or half empty, and they know that. Why I say that it works so well for people 
who are emotionally undefined is that, when they hook into an emotional person, they can easier tell 
whether that is filling their cup or not. They are in the other one's wave and they can tell right away. It is 
very clear for them. 

They are looking for that framework which will bring out that principle for them and give them the 
energy that will lead to expansion and prosperity. In other words, they need to find people that, in their 
own track, will make them feel good. These are people that are always looking for bliss. These people 
always ask you if you are happy because they want to be happy and they do not want to be sad. They are 
always looking for someone, whatever framework it is, that is going to be the one that makes them happy. 
"These people are real jerks. I don't like what they think and I don't like seeing them in public but they 
make me feel good and that is why they are my friends." They can be very fixed on that because for them 
the powerful force is any force that will give them the sense that their cup is half full. 

The potential spirit that comes when emotional awareness and energy are balanced and principled; or 
Boundless energy that ignores awareness at the risk of the spirit. The reality is that the moment you are 
dealing with a fourth line, you are dealing with this wave of kindness/meanness. If you are not clear about 
it and you don't have your framework right so that you know the timing, you crash. For example, you call 
up your friend and you can tell by their mood whether you should have anything to do with them that day. 
Otherwise, you end up in situations where you get into relationships where you think that this one will 
give you the track you want, the "I want to be happy," and the moment that this is not there, you can have 
a real crash. 

Teenagers who have this line have a very hard time because they are so focused on "I need to fill my 
cup," and always getting deeply depressed on the other side, when their cup is half empty. After all, this is 
where you have anorexia nervosa; this is where you have bulimia. This is where you have all of these 
problems trying to fill the spirit after it has been crashed. It is a key to recognize, particularly with young 
people that have the 55.4, that they can be fixed on being happy but they will always meet the other side. 
Sorry. They need to find people that will allow them, within the framework, within the principle, to 
accept both the happy and the sad, of what it is to be a moody person. Please keep in mind that somebody 
who is emotional and goes into the aura of somebody who is not emotional can drain them or bring them 
up. The emotionally defined one gets back what he sent out because the emotionally open one will reflect 
the mood back twice as strongly. 

55.5 Growth 

When you have the second line, you have Distrust, and when you come to the resonance of this line, the 
fifth line, you come to Growth. The only way to overcome distrust is through the power of seduction, our 
wave of selfishness/ selflessness. 

Growth has Uranus exalted. It says: The unusual ability in a position of power to accept advice and 
transform it innovatively. The 'unusual ability' only exists in a position of power; otherwise it is not there. 
This gift in a position of power allows one to continue to lead rather than being perceived as being led. 
One of the things to recognize about this is that the only way in which these people are going to fulfill 
their spirit is if they are in power socially. This is the whole thing for them: to be in power. 

If you have a boss that has the 55.5, he does not care if you like him or not when he is in a bad mood. He 
knows that you will come around when it is time for your pay check. The position of power allows him 
immunity in the social sense. 55.5's don't have to feel that somebody else is measuring their cup because 
they are in a position of power. If they are not in a position of power, they can become very unhappy. 
They carry underneath it the resonance of the distrust, where people are suspicious of them because their 
moods go up and down so much. 

In the Book of Letters: The emotional strength and spirit derived from positions of power. These people 
feel good in their spirit when they have work in which they have a sense of authority and they can live 
through their moods without being challenged because of the nature of their moods. 

On the other side, Sun in detriment. An integrative openness that in its broad acceptance of advice may be 
eventually eclipsed. An emotional openness where the spirit is at risk from conditioning. What happens is 
that when they are not in power, they try to get there through harmonizing. In doing so, it can end up 
being a problem because they don't have the authority and the power to withstand the condemnation. 
Remember that we are dealing with individuality here. We are talking about freaks and geniuses, about 
strangers, about those who can be rejected or alienated, put on the outside, ostracized. What you have in 
the detriment is this need to find a way to get to the power source but at the same time, because they are 
going up and down in their wave, they may not be able to get there because they don't have the 
authority. 

Only when these people are in the mood for things do they have the possibility of being in power. The 
moment that they are trying to do things when they are not in the mood, their power is just simply not 
going to be there. By the way, when they are in power they can be deeply seductive. They catch you with 
that. 

55.6 Selfishness 

We come to the sixth line and to the transition point, the place where the mutation will take place that will 
begin this process of spirit awareness. In terms of resonance, you can see that the third and the sixth line 
both have Saturn exalted. This line is called Selfishness. This is where the emotional spirit will awaken, 'v 
will have this process of emotional awareness that will awaken in humanity and emotional awareness will 
not exist inside of us. It is something that will exist outside of us. The only way in which emotional 
awareness is going to be possible is when the individual integrity is complete. 

It is one of the things to recognize that without the material requirements, the emotional system can never 
be sedated. When you are sitting together with people and you eat, whether the occasion is a celebration 
or not, and you make sure that the resources are there, you fill it all up. The nature of the materialism that 
lies here in the sixth line, the key to it is selfishness. But it is not the selfishness of the ego. It is the 
selfishness of the spirit. That is a very different thing. 

Selfishness is a word that people can misunderstand. It is not something that is negative. The spirit 
requires selfishness, or there will be no transition. It is essential because it is out of the integrity of the 
individual that this mutation will take place. And the only way it can take place is that the individual will 
be able to maintain their own uniqueness because the awareness is going to exist outside of them. One has 
to be healthy within oneself for the awareness to exist on the outside. 

Here in the Book of Letters: The potential of finding the spirit through materialism. When people come to 
me and they have this line, one of the things I tell them is, "Work. Work. Work." It is wonderful for them. 
To provide for oneself is an extraordinary thing. It elevates the spirit. I have seen this all my life, I see all 
this hunger in the world and I realize where all the turmoil and the dilemmas of the planet lie. This is all 
about recognizing that you will not get to the spirit until you can look after the body. You have no chance 
for the spirit unless you can look after the body. I am tired of holy rollers who are full of these pious 
platitudes. It is not about this, it is about feeding human beings. It is about being able to look after 
ourselves. This is fundamental. 

The only way that we can live properly with each other is when we learn to be able to work in the world 
in harmony with each other. That is what this is about. It is an essential ingredient. I meet people all the 
time. They think they are ready for enlightenment and they can barely feed themselves. Give me a breakl 
Who is going to feed you$ The reality is that there is no spirit unless you deal with the body. All of this 
other stuff is just intellectual babble, white magic. Ideas can be delicious. You can believe in them but 
you cannot eat them. First you have to be able to eat. 

The possibility that materialism becomes obsessive with a 'mean' spirit that will not share. Yes, well. 
What to do? Materialism can make you feel very good by going through this process and not sharing it. 
Well, all right. You will get the other side of it. But remember something about this: All sixth lines look 
out for something very special. They are looking far beyond the nature of what is there. This is not just 
about the individual being able to have the right spirit to be able to communicate socially through the 
12/22. This is the spirit that recognizes that a vast mutation has to take place and it is looking for that field 
of mutation. It is an emotional driving force in the world. This gate is about eating. Don't forget that the 
55 is about eating. It is an emotional driving force that says, "We have to have enough to eat, and then we 
can worry about the spirit." No sense building a church until the fields have been cleared and seeds have 
been planted. Make sure that there is food first, and then you can build a church. 

If somebody does things only for themselves, that is what they do. I don't judge. Anybody who is 
involved in this process, anybody that can maintain themselves is a lot closer to the spirit than somebody 
who can't, even if they are selfish. In this line, you have those who will make sure that others will benefit, 
and you have those that others will not benefit from. It goes to the family, to the 37.1, to the line of 
Mother/Father. 

A mythology for this line is the story of King Midas. Everything that he touched turned into gold and he 
touched his food and couldn't eat it because it turned into gold. The thing to recognize is that we are not 
dealing with tribal circuitry here. W(e are dealing with individual circuitry. This is the only place in the 
individual circuit where materialism is mentioned. The freak and the outsider that is always looking for 
the collective or the tribe to take them in, this is a signal for them that they have to lead in survival; not 
simply from that end but from the emotional spirit end as well. 

HEXAGRAM 56 THE WANDERER 

The throat center is the most complex of all the centers for a very obvious reason. It has eleven gates and 
it represents our capacity to metamorphose. In that sense, it contains within it a potential for all of us to 
manifest in this life. It contains the themes of manifestation that we have in this life. The Wanderer is one 
of the primary gates in the throat center that provides an outlet for the mind. One of the things to 
understand about the nature of the mind is that it is there to be able to conceptualize the nature of what it 
is to be in the world as a human being. One of the first things you learn in Human Design is that the mind 
has no capacity to dictate the nature of your life, but it is very good in taking a look at your life and at 
others' lives. 

The 56 is one of the two collective gates of communication. These are metamorphic gates and operate in a 
very unusual fashion. They translate inner vision, the visual capacity within us to conceptualize by seeing 
inside, into what we call language. These gates are very special gates because they contain within them 
our capacity to communicate with each other as human beings and to get the other to be able to see what 
we mean. These gates are translators, in a way. They are trying to transform an inner vision, an inner 
seeing, into language. The 56th gate is the voice of the mental abstract process. 

The gates of the throat have a voice. The voice of the 56th gate is a voice that is either hopeful or 
desperate because it is the voice of belief. It is the voice that says "I believe" or "I don't believe". The 56th 
gate is a gate of stimulation. One of the jokes is that the 56th gate, in terms of genetics, is a stop codon. 
Literally, the point of stimulation is the point in which you stop. In other words, you can tell a story but 
do not try to live out the story that you believe in. 

This 56th gate is a very important gate because, without this gate, we do not have a human learning 
process. This is a key to understand its importance. Everything about the abstract process is about the 
experiential path, which is loaded with crisis, mistakes and problems, cycles, beginnings, middles and 
ends. Without this path, we do not have a history and we do not have philosophy and we do not have the 
reflection upon our experience that gives us a sense of the truth of what it is to be us. 

The 56th gate is there to stimulate us with its storytelling. It is there to be able to take the images of its 
mind that we call 'ideas' on the abstract side, to take the ideas and bring them into a form as a story. So, 
when that story is told, you see that idea within yourself and you can make sense out of it. 

The stimulation: this gate has a great deal to do with our ability to advance as a civilization. That is, we 
collect more and more information out of our experiences. We code that information and put it into books 
and computers so that every single generation benefits from the experiences of the previous generation. 
There are no other animals like that. This is something very unique in us. This is a process that comes out 
of this gate. 

It says, in the Book of Letters: Manifestation as a verbal description of realization or not. What has been 
realized at the mental level then can be verbalized. Above the lines in the black book it says: Stability 
through movement. This is something very important to understand about the nature of ideas. The channel 
1 1/56 is the channel of Curiosity. It is a design of a searcher and a seeker. There is nothing in it that says 
that it is the design of finding the truth. It doesn't say: This is a design of finding an absolute. It is the 
design of a searcher and a seeker, and anybody who has that channel is going to spend their whole life 
searching and seeking because that is exactly what they do, no matter what they find. So, stability through 
movement. The moment one recognizes that ideas and beliefs and stimulation are transitory, that is the 
moment that you are seeing the true nature of what this gate is. 

The perpetuation of continuity through the linking of short term activity. Ideas are there to be explored, to 
be shared. They are there to be able to stimulate others. Don't get stuck in this mental process of saying "I 
have an idea," or that an idea is supposed to turn into what you invest your money in, your heart in, your 
life in. It is not about that. This is a gate of pure stimulation, to communicate to the other the story that 
you have, whatever that story may be. "You know what happened to me yesterday?" That is the 56th gate, 
and you can believe it or not. 

56.1 Quality 

This first line is called Quality. We know that all first lines are introspective by their very nature. Here, 
you get the essence of what stimulation is all about. 

Moon exalted. The practical sense that even short term activities should be of value. What that is really 
saying is here in the white book: Expression of practical ideas that have value. This is all about using this 
capacity to stimulate others with ideas that are of value, reflections that are of value and not just any old 
thing. The 56 just wants to stimulate. After all, it is not aware. It is a throat mechanic. What it needs to do 
is to constantly stimulate. But the reality is that the feedback is necessary. You need those who are really 
interested in that, who will believe in that, who will be stimulated by that. So, the importance is that 
whatever you are stimulating with should have value itself. The other thing is that when you are working 
with an idea, when you are overtaken by an idea, you have to go through the whole idea before you can 
jump and go to the next one. That is the other side of the coin. 

Mars in detriment. Whenever you see Mars, you know that you have a certain level of immaturity that 
exists. So on the other side of this line, there is a lot of immaturity built into that process of stimulation. 
"Let me stimulate you. Don't you believe me? This is me." There is the need to have the collective accept 
that process, and the Mars is: The ego drive to make an impression that will misuse energy in trivial 
pursuits. This is somebody who does not care what the quality of the concept is. They are only interested 
in getting out their stimulation and they try to stimulate people with anything, just to be able to get this 
feedback. 

In the white book: The drive to stimulate that will express any idea, no matter how trivial. Understand that 
this is the basis of what stimulation is all about. On one side, there is this clear recognition that the only 
things worth stimulating others with are things of value. There is no point telling somebody about this 
great idea of thermo-nuclear physics if it does not mean anything to them. It has to be of value to them; 
otherwise, you are not successfully going to stimulate them. 

But the tendency in this gate is simply to want to stimulate for the sake of stimulating. This is always 
going to run into difficulties because first lines do not know anything about the other side. The 56 wants 
to be able to stimulate but it does not really understand the idea in the first place. It just wants to be able 
to stimulate. This is why 56's become the great believers and disbelievers. They go through this whole 
process of belief and disbelief. The moment that they are trying to get people to believe in their 
stimulation, they discover that they themselves do not believe in it. The moment that you get into the 
trivial side of stimulation, you are always running into backlash from people because they are not going to 
believe you. 

56.2 Linkage 

The 56th hexagram contains two lines that use the word 'genius.' Genius is mentioned six times out of 384 
lines, so there is a great potential for the very unusual. Both of these lines, the second and the fifth, are in 
resonance to each other and they are both exalted by Uranus. There is an extraordinary quality of 
unusualness that can exist in this stimulation and it can be of enormous value at a deep intellectual level. 

Whenever we are dealing with a second line, always remember that these first three lines are not well 
equipped to deal with the other side. The other side in this case is the idea itself. 

When you are dealing with the second line, you are always dealing with projection. Every second line that 
you have is projecting the quality of that hexagram out into the world, but you do not necessarily have the 
depth. First lines are always busy finding their foundation, but second lines are just projecting it out with 
no way of looking inside. 

Think about what that is like for somebody who is a stimulator. If you have the 56.2, you are always 
projecting out that you can stimulate others. So they come into your aura waiting to be stimulated and 
either you can or you can't. You don't really know. You are just projecting out this field in you to others 
that you are the one that can stimulate them. Maybe you can; maybe you can't. 

Linkage. Uranus exalted. Isolated genius that will eventually find continuity through recognition and 
support. It is isolated because this is a genius for stimulation in which the awareness or depth is unknown. 
Here is somebody that has a gift within them, potentially, to be very stimulating for others, but they do 
not really know that they have that gift. And it may not happen now and not tomorrow, it may show up 
sometime, somewhere down the track. It can happen three days before you die, when you are 92; or it can 
happen right away. 

It also means that it is something that will occur. The person that has the second line, that is projecting 
outwards, they really need somebody to come into their aura, recognize their gift and say, "Wow. You can 
really stimulate others," and the second line will say, "Really? Do you think so?" Because they do not 
know that they have that depth. 

In the white book: A genius for stimulating expression that will take time to mature and will need others 
to recognize it. What that means is if you have a child that has the 56.2, you need to recognize that you 
need to encourage them to see that they have this power to stimulate. Otherwise, they get found out at an 
early age and they can forever hold back that gift within them. Anytime that you see a second line in 
somebody's chart, you know that is a place where you can go to them and provide them with what they 
need, that is, the recognition that what they are projecting out is also real underneath. These people do not 
know that. They recognize their own projection going out but they do not really know, and underneath 
that can lie a great deal of insecurity. 

The Moon in detriment. Asuperficiality... (Again, this is a projected field. There is no genuine depth in 
that.) ...which collapses under recognition and is eventually forced to move on. The inability to know 
whether you can really stimulate others or not always puts that person in that position of having that test. 
Somebody comes and says, "Okay, stimulate me. Go ahead. I dare you." If you can't, of course, there is 
the collapse. 

A gift for communicating, but not enough depth. So the 56.2's have to recognize that it will take them 
time to be able to really be secure in their communicating gift. The best for them, by the way, is the 
resonance of the 1 1 .2 or 1 1 .5 in people or transits that they meet. 

56.3 Alienation 

When you get to the third line, to the completion of the lower trigram, you are dealing with the concept or 
terminology of adaptation. Everything about the nature of the third line is about the recognition that it 
involves a process that we call trial and error. This is a wave of bonds made or broken, and this is the 
learning process in life. Nothing distinguishes the third line more than this process of: you can't do it. It 

does not work. You try it again in another way. It does not work. You go through this process of trial and 
error. 

Here the trial and error is called Alienation. It says: Determined self-sufficiency. Understand something. 
It is very difficult for somebody with the 56th gate to be self-sufficient. They are dependent on the ideas 
and the concepts coming from the 11th gate and they are forced to adapt. Yet, at the same time, the 56th 
gate, because it is a metamorphic gate in the throat, needs to be the one that does the expressing. The self- 
sufficiency in the third line is, "I want to be the one that does the speaking." This is the need to be the 
stimulator. There still is not a clear understanding that there is something on the other side of the channel 
that they are going to have to make a deal with, that they are going to have to work out an arrangement 
with. There is still this inner sense of simply, "I am a stimulator and, because of that, I do not want 
anybody to interfere with my stimulation." Out of that comes all this trial and error. 

Sun exalted. A will and egoism that often proves overbearing and guarantees continued isolation. Here, 
this is acceptable, given the Sun's intrinsic vitality. Or, as the white book says: The drive to control and be 
the focus of expression. It is very clear to the 56.3 that they can really express themselves and stimulate 
others, but they do not want to be interfered with because the moment that they are interfered with, they 
have to start all over again. "Ah, I can't do it this way. I have to do it that way. I can't stimulate them this 
way. I will stimulate them that way." Because they want to do it their own way, they often offend other 
people who are there as part of their process. 

On the other side of this, Venus in detriment. The reversed aesthetic that offends others, ensures isolation 
and eliminates support. "I do the talking here. I do the stimulating here, and not you. Don't interfere with 
my stimulation. Don't interfere with my belief system. You don't believe in me? Then I don't want to have 
anything to do with you. You are wrong and I am right." The mistakes that are made out of concepts: 
there are so many people running around who have ideas in their head that they really think are absolutes. 
If they have the third line, they will stand there and scream as loud as they can, "Marx is great." He had 
the 11th gate. Very nice. But the reality is that they can scream so loud and not hear, not take in from 
others, so that they can really offend others. 

My constant warning to you: Do not get caught up in making a moralistic judgment about whether this 
line is good or bad. It is not about that. It is a process. The third line has a resonance in the sixth line, 
which has a potential for wisdom. Wisdom can only come about through trial and error as a process in 
life. If you never make mistakes in this life, you can never be wise. That is a basic formula. 

This third line, though it may alienate a lot of people, the person that is doing all the alienating may 
eventually get to a point of real wisdom about what to stimulate and what not to stimulate with. They 
finally learn how to adapt to others. The first three lines are always at this disadvantage that they are not 
transpersonal. They do not really understand what is on the other side. They have to go through their own 
process and in that they can always be alienating. 

People who have the first line, you do not really know whether they are there or not. They are not 
showing you anything out of that first line. You have to go digging for that. They are into their own 
process. The second line is pushing all this out but you do not know what is underneath and they are not 
capable of that. The third line is ready to adapt but it does not know what to adapt to because it does not 
know where it is going to come from. They are involved in their own 
processes. 

The drive to control the expression at the expense of stimulation. "Don't interfere with me. I will not tell 
you anything unless you are quiet." A friend of mine, many years ago, was a teacher and he had the 56.3. 
He was the kind of person who will stand in front of a class and say, "If you are not quiet, I will not teach 

you." This is the 56.3. You have to control everything first and some people do not want to be controlled. 
"I will not be quiet. I am not interested in what you have to say. You are not very interesting." And all of 
a sudden, that person has to adapt and they do not want to adapt. They want to be in control and start 
screaming, "Shut up. I am talking." It can be quite a process until they learn." 

Every time that you see the collective channels being completely defined in the mind, you know that these 
people are close to being impossible in terms of trying to get through their fixedness. That is their gift 
after all: they are here to have both ends fixed and they have a very specialized process but, because of 
that, it is very hard to get in. It takes time. It will be a longer process for them to be able to go through an 
adaptation. If you have the 56.3 connected to the 11, it is difficult for you to learn to adapt because you 
are so fixed on your own ideas that you are not open to the possibility of adaptation. 

56.4 Expediency 

Now, we come to the fourth line in the upper trigram. The 1 1 .4 is called The Teacher and it is an exalted 
line. Our evolutionary process was changed by a mutation that took place in the axis of the 11.4 and the 
12.4. The 12.4 is The Prophet, the arousing of the stagnant. It opened up the communicating capability in 
our throat. The opposition to that is the 1 1 A, The Teacher. 

This line is broken up into three possibilities: the teacher, the guru and the sage: all of the possibilities for 
being able to communicate philosophical and conceptual ideas. Here, when you are looking at the fourth 
line, you are looking at the direct resonance to this very important line of being able to teach. In the fourth 
line, we are dealing with a process of externalization. This is the beginning of a process that is 
transpersonal. The fourth line realizes that there is an idea on the other end and, in order for the 56.4 to be 
a good stimulator, they have to be able to handle the idea at the other end and externalize it. This 
externalization is about being focused and being very clear that this is the thing that you have to push 
across. They can be really one -tracked in their process. 

The other thing to recognize about all fourth lines is that they are rooted in the concept of opportunism. 
All fourth lines only get to externalize at the right moment and if they try to externalize with the wrong 
timing, it does not really work very well for them because they are very fixed. 

This fourth line is called Expediency. The perfection of the superficial personality that can mask, when 
essential, its true feelings to secure protection. Imagine that the 56 is a microphone and the 1 1 with the 
ideas is the voice. The microphone is not interested in taking on the persona of the 1 1 . It is a mask. It is 
simply going to release the information. It is very important to understand that in this fourth line is the 
ultimate storyteller who tells stories as a role. It is superficial. This is somebody that is just a good 
storyteller and in that role of being a storyteller, they can stimulate you and get the idea across. 

If I were to do the chart of Jesus, if that was possible, I am sure that I would find the 56.4 because this is 
the line of telling parables, of telling stories to get your message across. It is not that you believe in your 
own story. Please understand that. There is an old joke about a family sitting together and the father is 
telling a story, and the child finally interrupts and it says, "Papa, is this true?" and this mother slaps him 
on the back of his head and says, "Don't interrupt your father. 

He is telling a story." The magic of this line is: do not believe your own story. Recognize what the story is 
for. The story is a delivery system. To be the storyteller is a mold to deliver it. 

Mercury in detriment. Expedient behavior whose price is a constant stressful alertness and nervous 
anxiety in fear of losing what has been gained. These people believe in their own stories. Instead of telling 

a story to stimulate you, they will put themselves into that story, a lie in that sense, and believe that story 
themselves. These are the kind of people that get caught up in all of that. 

The role as reality. The fear of silence and of being uncovered. In other words, these are people that will 
use storytelling to try to make sure that everybody notices who they are. And because they use 
storytelling to be noticed, they will lie in that storytelling. They go in for their job and they say, "Yes, I 
have done this for many years and I know this very well," and in that moment of doing that they believe it 
themselves. After all, this is all about believing. 

Those people that get caught up in their own story and start believing in their own story always end up 
being challenged. There is no question about that. And those who simply come out with the storytelling as 
the way to get the information across show the other side of the capacity. In both cases you have people 
that must stimulate others, and this is the underlying force. It is a fourth line. It is a line of externalization. 
It is a driving force in their process. The key is: wait for the opportunities. That is true for every fourth 
line. 

56.5 Attracting attention 

Everything about these gates of primary communication is not to forget that that is what they are. They 
are not gates of action. They are only gates of communication. What happens so often to people who have 
a gift to stimulate is that they think that this gift automatically means the ability to turn it into action. That 
is not true. The gift of being able to stimulate, to tell stories and the value of the 56 is about sharing what 
it is to be human with others. Our whole mental process is so that we can come to grips with what it is to 
be a human being and live in this world. It is not about dictating what we do. Every time I do somebody's 
reading, I am always telling people the same thing. The mind can't tell you what to do. It does not matter 
whether it is defined or undefined, connected to the throat or not. It does not make any damn difference. It 
is not going to be able to tell you what to do and it is never going to work for you. The mind does not do 
that. That is not its job. Its job is not to tell us what to do but to examine the nature of our doing, to look at 
our process. 

This stimulation is not about getting people to do something. It is there to share in the awareness of what 
it is to be human. That is what it is about. Because we live on the mental plane and all of you have been 
deeply conditioned to think that what you think is what you should do, or what you would like to think is 
what you would like to do and all of the things that go with it, we end up in this horrible place in which 
human beings don't live out what they do, and they take these ideas seriously as a game plan for life. "I 
have this wonderful idea. Why don't we all jump off this side of the bridge and see how many of us 
survive?" Well, very nice. An idea is not necessarily something that requires any kind of doing. Ideas are 
about stimulating each other about the nature of what it is to be here in the world. 

When you get to the fifth line, you get to universalization. The way the world sees this gate of stimulation 
is that they see it as something that attracts attention, and that's what it does. This is the line of Attracting 
attention. Here, again we have the resonance to the second line. In the second line we see that all second 
line people are projecting out without necessarily knowing the depth underneath, and all fifth line people 
are being projected on. If you are a 56.5, every time that somebody comes into your aura, their projection 
is that you are a storyteller. That may or may not be true, but that is their projection on you. Their 
projection is that you are the stimulator, you are the storyteller. 

You know what this is like. You have a dinner party and you want to make sure that somebody is there 
who keeps everybody talking. You will always pick a fifth line because they are the ones you project on. 
"This one is okay. This one is very stimulating." It is a projection but that does not mean that underneath 
that projection is no power. If you have a fifth line, wherever it is, the outside world will project onto that. 

That means something very special. What that means is that the outside will give you an opportunity to 
tell your story and if you are a lousy storyteller, too bad. But the outside world will give you that 
opportunity because they will project on you that you are the stimulator and that you have a story to tell 
them. 

Uranus exalted. Unusualness, innovation and sometimes genius as guarantees of eventually attracting 
attention and support. The opportunity is always there. Genetically, it is built in. This is, after all, a 
stimulating, storytelling gate. The capacity is there. It just may not be the right stimulation, but 
nonetheless, everybody is going to come and project on that. In the white book: Stimulation at its most 
innovative and unusual. 

Mars in detriment: All too often a tendency to attract attention that is self-defeating in its effects. What 
happens so often, when you go through the lines and these kinds of statements, is that we take them into 
our minds in the context of our lives at the present time. But please understand that this is a process of 
coming into the world, being born with this kind of a line and going through the development of your 
infancy, your childhood, your whole aging process. It can be very difficult when you are a child because 
everybody projects on you. This is the kind of child (with the 56.5) that comes into the classroom late and 
starts to give an excuse of why they are late, and the teacher is not going to believe it. The teacher will 
project onto this child: this child is a storyteller and it may or may not tell me the truth. You have to have 
a really good story. So, this projection gives you an opportunity but at the same time, it can pull the rug 
out from underneath your feet. That is the other side to see about it. 

Every time that you have a fifth line, you have to recognize that the more you mature into the nature of 
that hexagram (it takes time, all these processes take time), you get to a point where, at that moment of 
projection on you, you are genuinely ready to respond. There is a gift that lies in here but there is always 
that pressure of projection. This is a line where it is very difficult for people who are intrinsic liars. The 
moment you have an intrinsic genetic liar, and we have gates that bring out this quality, then you have 
somebody that will be projected on all of their life that they are just simply a storyteller and they are not 
to be believed. After all, nothing the 5 wants more than to be believed. "Do you believe me? Please, 
believe in me." They want you to believe in them and everybody who comes to these people wants to 
believe in them. "I want to believe that you are telling me the truth but my projection says that you are 
lying." This is part of the process that the 5 has to deal with. 

The power of stimulation to provoke and disturb. The moment that you have a projected force on you, 
people come with their projection, which means that they do not see you; so, depending on what you 
bring back to them, they can be made quite uncomfortable in that process. Everything about what we 
consider stimulation is hooked into this. We have the tradition throughout our history of the traveling 
storyteller. Now, we live in the world of online and internet storytelling, of television and film, which is 
all part of this archetype of attracting attention. 

56.6 Caution 

When you get to the sixth line, you get to the end of a process. This sixth line, like all sixth lines, does not 
really have anything to do with the hexagram itself. It is already beyond that process. It is like the roof of 
a house. You are looking out over the top and you do not get to see anymore what is inside because you 
have been through that process and you are looking out for what is beyond all that. When you are dealing 
with a gate of stimulation and you come to the sixth line, that is somebody who may stimulate you or not. 

The frequency wave of all sixth lines is a wave that we call trust or not. It is about trust. Every sixth line 
is no longer simply interested in what is the harmonic gate at the other end of the channel but all sixth 
lines are looking at the entire process. They are looking towards the whole circuit. They are not just 

interested in an idea, they want to know where the ideas will go, what it will cost in terms of time, energy 
and spirit. What kind of change and crisis will it bring? Will it bring success of not? Can it have a 
beginning, a middle and an end? Is it really worthwhile doing it? The sixth line is caught up in trying to 
see: is it really worth it? Why should I bother to stimulate anyone if that stimulation is not going to get to 
this and that? 

When you come to the abstract process, you come to a process rooted in expectation. Every time you look 
at somebody's chart and you see a gate that is part of the abstract circuit, you know right away that in that 
gate, you have all this expectation. It is the expectation that if I do this, I am going to get that. This 
expectation can be a very painful process because there is absolutely no guarantee whatsoever, that if you 
do step 1, 2, 3 and 4, they will give you your reward. The 56.6 says, "I know. I really do. If I stimulate, I 
do expect to have this and that and, quite frankly, from my experience, I don't see that because every time 
I stimulate it goes like this or that, but it does not really bring all of that." So when you get to the sixth 
line, it is not like you are saying, "Aha, here is somebody that is going to stimulate us." Maybe they never 
say a word to you. Instead of this being someone that can express, "I believe", they may believe in 
nothing at all because they are looking for something else. They are looking for more than just simply 
another idea. What is built into this is the fact that this line, more than any other line, is open to every 
single kind of idea that you can imagine. Everything. Open to the whole field of possible stimulation and 
due to that, they may stimulate nothing at all. 

Caution. The prudence, when linkage has been achieved, to honor its new commitments in order to secure 
its footing. Literally, what that says is that the moment you connect to an idea, if you are really going to 
stimulate with that, you have to stay with the whole process. You have to go through the whole thing. 
You have to see how the whole thing works out. 

Honesty in expression. Living by one's word. It is very difficult to be an abstract person and to live by 
your word. This is somebody that wants to be able to know that what they are telling other people to 
believe in, they believe in themselves. If you go to the 10.6, you see that in all sixth lines the hidden 
behavior is always about the question, "Are we hypocrites, or not? How can we be a role model if we are 
hypocritical in that role?" This sixth line here is dealing with the same process. "I am not just going to 
stimulate somebody because I can. I will stimulate them with something that is true to my own spirit, so 
that I am not a hypocrite." Very hard to do because ideas are unstable by their very nature. It is not easy to 
find an idea that you can live with. You look in your lives and see how many ideas have survived that you 
have carried inside of you. They come and they go. The 56.6 knows this. 

At the other end of this, you have Pluto in detriment. A very powerful Pluto transit and we have all kinds 
of people from 1939 to 1941 that carry this Pluto in 56. The profound unconscious wanderer, where 
external yearning for acceptance will unconsciously release the exact energy that creates rejection. A 
difficult role, where the self is unknown and not recognized with predictable results. In the white book: 
Wandering throughout the life from one expression to the next, unable to find the stimulation that one 
could live by. 

Every single person that carries this energy, they will travel their whole life through every kind of 
possible idea. They will go through everything to try to find the one idea that they can really live with. 
Until then, other than when they are young, they will stop stimulating other people with these ideas. 
When they get to a point where they recognize that no idea is good enough for them, they become anti- 
stimulating. Somebody comes up to them and says, "I have this great idea," and the 56.6 answers, "I have 
heard it. I am not interested. I know that stuff. I know that philosophy. I know that school of thought. I 
know those ideas. I know that way. It is not something that I can live with." 

Living with it does not mean living with it in the moment; it is about being able to live with it throughout 
your life because you have to constantly go back and reflect on it, to see clearly that it has been of value 
for you. There are so many people I know of that generation (around 1940) who have gone through so 
many concepts in their process, and so many of them end up deeply disillusioned because they get to this 
sense that there is no idea that they can really live by because ideas are, by their very nature, transitory. 

When you get to the sixth line, you can see the magic of the wheel. When you get to the 56.6, you are 
moving in the wheel to the 31.1. The next gate you come to is the gate of Influence, a logical gate to 
guide humanity and order humanity into the future. The 56.6 is an abstract gate, designed to reflect on the 
past; that sixth line is saying, "I do not want ideas. I want something that I can live by, so that I can 
stimulate others and have a valid influence on their lives in the future." 

This is where the great confusion comes from. So many people think that ideas are things that we need to 
have in the future. Ideas are there to examine the past. Only logic can project into the future. The abstract 
is there to reflect on the post, and this 56.6 is sitting on that cusp and it is saying, "Yes, but these ideas 
that come out of my past experience, unless they are of value to humanity in the future, unless they are of 
value to me in the future, I am not going to be involved with any of them. They step out of the idea 
business. 

You can also see this magic because you go from a primary gate of communication in the 56.6 to a 
primary gate of identity in the 31.1. The 56.6 is deeply concerned about its identity because only ideas 
that are really of value in life allow them to have an intellectual identity that feels good. It goes 
immediately to a gate of identity and trying to find that identity. This is why idea people always want to 
be leaders. They are not equipped. 

The frequency wave of all sixth lines is a wave that we call trust or not. It is about trust. Every sixth line is no 
longer simply interested in what is the harmonic gate at the other end of the channel but all sixth lines are 
looking at the entire process. They are looking towards the whole circuit. They are not just interested in an idea, 
they want to know where the ideas will go, what it will cost in terms of time, energy and spirit. What kind of 
change and crisis will it bring? Will it bring success of not? Can it have a beginning, a middle and an end? Is it 
really worthwhile doing it? The sixth line is caught up in trying to see: is it really worth it? Why should I bother to 
stimulate anyone if that stimulation is not going to get to this and that? 

When you come to the abstract process, you come to a process rooted in expectation. Every time you look at 
somebody's chart and you see a gate that is part of the abstract circuit, you know right away that in that gate, 
you have all this expectation. It is the expectation that if I do this, I am going to get that. This expectation can 
be a very painful process because there is absolutely no guarantee whatsoever, that if you do step 1, 2, 3 and 
4, they will give you your reward. The 56.6 says, "I know. I really do. If I stimulate, I do expect to have this and 
that and, quite frankly, from my experience, I don't see that because every time I stimulate it goes like this or 
that, but it does not really bring all of that." So when you get to the sixth line, it is not like you are saying, "Aha, 
here is somebody that is going to stimulate us." Maybe they never say a word to you. Instead of this being 
someone that can express, "I believe", they may believe in nothing at all because they are looking for 
something else. They are looking for more than just simply another idea. What is built into this is the fact that 
this line, more than any other line, is open to every single kind of idea that you can imagine. Everything. Open 
to the whole field of possible stimulation and due to that, they may stimulate nothing at all. 

Caution. The prudence, when linkage has been achieved, to honor its new commitments in order to secure its 
footing. Literally, what that says is that the moment you connect to an idea, if you are really going to stimulate 

with that, you have to stay with the whole process. You have to go through the whole thing. You have to see 
how the whole thing works out. 

Honesty in expression. Living by one's word. It is very difficult to be an abstract person and to live by 
your word. This is somebody that wants to be able to know that what they are telling other people to 
believe in, they believe in themselves. If you go to the 10.6, you see that in all sixth lines the hidden 
behavior is always about the question, "Are we hypocrites, or not? How can we be a role model if we are 
hypocritical in that role?" This sixth line here is dealing with the same process. "I am not just going to 
stimulate somebody because I can. I will stimulate them with something that is true to my own spirit, so 
that I am not a hypocrite." Very hard to do because ideas are unstable by their very nature. It is not easy to 
find an idea that you can live with. You look in your lives and see how many ideas have survived that you 
have carried inside of you. They come and they go. The 56.6 knows this. 

At the other end of this, you have Pluto in detriment. A very powerful Pluto transit and we have all kinds 
of people from 1939 to 1941 that carry this Pluto in 56. The profound unconscious wanderer, where 
external yearning for acceptance will unconsciously release the exact energy that creates rejection. A 
difficult role, where the self is unknown and not recognized with predictable results. In the white book: 
Wandering throughout the life from one expression to the next, unable to find the stimulation that one 
could live by. 

Every single person that carries this energy, they will travel their whole life through every kind of 
possible idea. They will go through everything to try to find the one idea that they can really live with. 
Until then, other than when they are young, they will stop stimulating other people with these ideas. 
When they get to a point where they recognize that no idea is good enough for them, they become anti- 
stimulating. Somebody comes up to them and says, "I have this great idea," and the 56.6 answers, "I have 
heard it. I am not interested. I know that stuff. I know that philosophy. I know that school of thought. I 
know those ideas. I know that way. It is not something that I can live with." 

HEXAGRAM 57 THE GENTLE 

So we move to the individual process and in doing so, we come to what is described in the Rave I'Ching 
as an extraordinary gate. The heading over the lines of the 57th hexagram is: The extraordinary power of 
clarity. The 57th gate, like all the other gates that are part of the integration process, is by its very nature 
much more complex than the other gates. The 57th gate represents the primary awareness of the 
integration channel and therefore, the 57 with the 34 is the awareness that establishes the archetype of 
being human. It is the 57 that establishes the nature of our Perfected Form when connected to the 10th 
gate, which is our design for survival, so it is the awareness for our survival. When the 57 is connected to 
the 20th hexagram, it is penetrating intuitive awareness in the now. 

Everything about the individual process is acoustic. In the 28th gate, the potential, we have the fear of 
death and this deep need to struggle for whether life is worthwhile, or not. When you come to the 57th 
hexagram, we find the fear of tomorrow. Out of this fear of tomorrow and out of this acoustic field comes 
an awareness that tells us so much about what it is to stay alive because the 57th gate is really all about 
that: the awareness to stay alive. It is the gate of intuitive clarity and the possibility is the awareness to 
struggle for clarity, or not. It is still carrying the struggle from the 28/38 with it. 

Real clarity can only exist in the now for this gate and after all, it is only half of the channel. It does not 
have the 20th gate at the other end. The awareness possibility is individuation, self consciousness, and the 
existential ear, the right ear. This is the ear that hears in the now. This whole process that we are going to 
look at in the 57th gate, please understand that it is in terms of what it is to stay alive as a human being. 
That awareness is essential. This is the gate that leads to that door. 

This is individual circuitry, so please remember that the real key to individual survival will be in the third 
and fourth line because they carry individual themes. In the first two lines, we are looking at survival that 
has a tribal quality to them. 

57.1 Confusion 

When we are looking at the first line, it is called Confusion. Here is our line of introspection. Isn't it 
interesting that the 28.1 was called Preparation? The preparation leads to confusion. How nice. 

Venus exalted. The gift of penetrating to the inner meaning that ensures timely action. This is a deeply 
misunderstood line. This gift of penetrating to the inner meaning: there is no inner meaning here. There is, 
but it is lymphatic inner meaning and it will not come to you in any kind of language that your mind 
understands. This penetrating to the inner meaning is simply the ability to recognize that your intuition is 
there and operating, and let it do its job. This line can be very difficult for the people who have it. These 
people need to learn to see that their intuition really works. You have to figure it out in introspection. You 
have to see that your intuition really does work for you. 

The Moon in detriment, where feelings are no substitute for clarity and can lead to indecision. Emotions. 
The 57 is called The Gentle and awareness can be very profound and penetrating and not so gentle. The 
first thing that the 57th gate knows is that its process of The Gentle is very weak. Our immune system can 
be overwhelmed at any given time by the emotional system. The moment that the emotions are dictating 
survival is the moment that there is real confusion. There is no detail at this level, which means that they 
are not listening, which means that they are not hearing and therefore, they will be immediately in danger. 

In the white book: The possibility of the intuition penetrating to the inner meaning. That is just saying that 
the intuition can penetrate to the inner meaning. It is not that you get to know the inner meaning. You get 
the response out of the system. It knows in the moment. This is a gate of knowing. 

The other side is: The possibility that confusion will overpower the intuition. If you do not rely on your 
intuition, if you are somebody who has a defined splenic system and you do not rely on your splenic 
system, it will always be overpowered. That is why first line people, in this particular case, because it is 
very complex with the three different connections, need to recognize that they have to begin to trust their 
intuition instead of saying three days later, "I knew it." 

The moment that you trust it, you see that it is getting to the inner meaning and then you do not have to 
allow these other processes to get in the way. I have a very powerful intuition and I never paid any 
attention to it until I went through my process. I was one of these people who would always say, "I knew 
that," but it was always after. If you have a defined splenic system and you have the first line, this is a 
place where you really have to go to work and say, "Okay, I have to let it show me that it can penetrate to 
the inner meaning," in order to learn what intuition really is. 

Remember, this is the beginning of the hexagram process and the first thing that it is saying to you is that 
people have a very hard time (this is the foundation) recognizing the power of the intuition even when 
they have it, because it is weak. 

57.2 Cleansing 

Here we come to projection. So you do not have the introspection. This line is called Cleansing. The 
clarity to establish proper values and ideals must be accompanied by resolute determination to maintain 
them. The establishment of proper values and ideals is not mental. It is not thought-out. If you have this 
line, your values and ideals come out intuitively. They are coming out so that you can project them 
outwards to the other side, to the 20, in this case. 

Venus exalted. Perfected cleansing through inner realization. Look at the 28.2 which is called Shaking 
hands with the devil. This is the potential of this line. After you have shaken hands with the devil and had 
your alliance, then you can come to the 57 and say, "Okay, now I know what my proper values are 
supposed to be." Every struggle will change your morality. Somebody who will struggle with you and 
show you that life is of value, they may change your morality about the nature of what you thought about 
those people and what they are. 

Out of the second line, there is always a potential to project out these values and ideals, but they are not 
thought-out. This is why people are uncomfortable with their intuition sometimes. Those values and 
ideals are not a mental construct. They are coming out of you to keep you alive, after all. 

Moon in detriment. A superficial cleansing that tends to hide the dirt underneath the carpet. This is a very 
funny line, but it is so true. I know so many people who have this line and when I read this part of the line 
they start to giggle because that is really what they do. What is in you is in you. It is there. One of the 
things to recognize about the mundane level is it is all very obvious: sweeping the dirt underneath the 
carpet. The other level to that is not being ready to accept the values and ideals that are being projected 
out of your own system. In other words, having your own morality that says, "No, no my mind says that is 
not right. I will sweep that under the carpet. I will sweep me under the carpet and I will try to be 
something else that I am not." 

The possibility for proper values and ideals through intuition. Not through thinking, not through feeling, 
but spontaneously through intuition. The possibility that the depth of the intuition will be treated 
superficially. Jiirgen had a client with this line in the detriment. She was a stewardess and that was what 
she did between landing and the new departure. She had only a little time to clean everything, so she hid 
the dirt. 

57.3 Acuteness 

Third lines and fourth lines carry individual themes, and we are dealing with an individual process here in 
the 57th gate. This third line is of special significance. It is one of the nine hexagrams in which there is a 
singularity instead of a polarity. It is called Acuteness. There is no detriment. 

It has Mercury exalted. The perfected intelligence, where clarity eliminates doubt and ensures 
manifestation. Third lines are about adaptation. This is the capacity to adapt to life. This is the survival of 
the species. This is the ability to adapt in the now to life, to the threat of life, to the potentials of being 
alive, to the potentials of the Perfected Form, to the potentials of Penetrating Awareness. All of that is 
rooted in the third line as a capacity. By the way, it is still a third line, which means it can be very 
irresponsible. It can adapt for itself, for its own survival, while leaving others behind, while not caring for 
others, while not adapting to be able to look after them as well. 

The third line is the first attempt of going to the other side and, in doing so, it gets the glory that the 57 
looks for. "I am afraid of tomorrow and now I am in the now, and in the now there is no tomorrow. In no 
tomorrow I am alive and everything about my consciousness says, 'This is correct. I am alive. "The reality 
is that this Acuteness, though it is a very beautiful line, is for the individual alone. But the moment that 
that has something to do with anybody else, this is not so nice. This is individual adaptation. It is an 
individual theme and can be coldly cruel in ignoring the needs of others. They are part of the great 
disappearing act. If they disappear, follow them. They will survive. 

57.4 The Director 

'v a come to the upper trigram and have the resonance to the first line. The fourth line is called The 
Director. The mastery of relationships that through clarity can maximize productivity, while the 
sensitivity to inter-relationships will ensure harmony. 

Here lies the intuition to be able to stay alive through a need for others. These are people that are always 
going to be dependent on others to keep them alive so that they can get their form. The 57 needs the 10, 
the 20 and the 34. Due to its externalization quality, everything about the fourth line is that it is deeply 
focused and fixed in one area. These people are fixed on the relationship. They are fixed on being able to 
deal with their fear of tomorrow by intuitively recognizing how to handle their relationships with others. 
This is by its nature very selfish. Because it is a fourth line, it resonates to the emotional wave of 
kindness/meanness and brotherhood/sisterhood. It resonates to the awareness field of Corruption. Think 
about this, what it actually means. The fourth line, The Director, is definitely a skill. It is an intuitive 
capacity to work with people in order to be able to survive in the now. 

Mars in detriment. A tendency to be dictatorial rather than directorial. This goes back to the individual not 
wanting to be led. This is an individual that says, "Yes, you do this. If you do not do this, the boat sinks." 
They are interested in being able to stay alive. 

The possible intuitive clarity to master relationships. For the benefit of survival, for the benefit of getting 
to the now, for the benefit of getting the energy of the 34. 

On the other side: With such a gift, the possibility of being intuitively dictatorial. Intuitively dictatorial is 
not being able to say, "Stop thatl" or, "Blame them." It is not a mental concept. Many people who have 
this line may end up feeling very guilty in their life because they hear themselves being intuitively 
dictatorial in the moment, and they wonder why they are like that because they do not really know. 
Everything that you see in the line, you will get. When you have the detriment of this line, you will be 

intuitively dictatorial and that is all subjective. These people are like that because it is not up to them to be 
able to survive. So the whole thing is that they are always convinced that they need others to help them to 
survive, and in that moment they tell people what to do in order that they can survive. The rest may 
survive too but they are only interested in themselves. It is individual. "You keep your finger in the dike." 

57.5 Progression 

In the fifth line, we change from an individual theme to a collective theme and in doing so, we find the 
opportunity to bring survival techniques or survival awareness from the individual to the collective. 
Remember that the individual is always mutating the collective. I know this line intimately because I have 
my personality Earth in there, and I get my grounding there. 

It is called Progression. The natural ability to establish new forms while maintaining the powers of re- 
evaluation and re-examination. This provides the clarity to examine the data and assess the process. This 
is all at the intuitive level. It is at an intuitive level that one can recognize forms that can allow the 
collective to survive. It is what it is rooted in. 

In the detriment: The tendency to keep on keeping on that can end up as a misguided missile. When in 
action, the intuition may become overwhelmed and unable to assess and evaluate its progress. I am a 
single definition doer. What happened to me in my life is that once I got into action, I would forget all 
about where my intuition would guide me because the intuition can be overpowered all the time. I 
watched that with the Moon, when it comes once a month. When the Moon is in this line my intuition 
gets blinded. Whatever my body, my physical process is into gets overwhelmed. That is neither good nor 
bad. In those moments, obviously, it is not for me to know. 

Lines that are positive or negative in terms of the language: that does not mean that they are in reality. 
You live out your own nature and you discover that everything in your own nature is exactly the way it 
should be. Now, I have Pluto sitting there at the other side and I am deeply involved in my intuitive 
process, which is just listening to it. This is the whole thing about understanding the nature of the whole 
intuitive system anyway. This is not a mind system. This is not a mind awareness. This is something that 
you can only witness. You can only experience what your intuition tells you and allow it to guide you, if 
that is your nature, your design. 

57.6 Utilization 

The roof of the house. The line of transition. The acceptance that clarity is a double-edged sword. There 
are situations where understanding cannot lead to rectification. Here, Uranus' innovative quality can 
generally make the best out of an otherwise difficult but rarely permanent situation. The intuition does not 
always give you an answer that is of any value. It does not always help. Your intuition can tell you 
something, it can lead you somewhere (anyone who has the sixth line will know that) but it won't always 
give you the answer. Due to that, it can lead to depression. 

All sixth lines can have this quality because they are looking for something much larger. They are not just 
looking to survive. They want to survive with a quality of life. They want life to be of value. They are 
looking to survive in their Perfected Form. They want to fulfill the nature of their Archetype. They are 
looking to be awake. All of that is part of the nature of the 57th gate. 

Mars in detriment. When clarity points' to a problem one is unable because of circumstances to solve, a 
tendency to anger and frustration that provokes inevitably hftile action. Both the 48th gate and the 57th 
gate carry in them the potential for frustration, the 48th gate much more than the 57th. The sixth line 
recognizes the nature of intuition (it is the completion of the process here in this line) and it knows that it 

cannot answer everything. It can be relied on to be your intuition but it cannot be relied on to be God. It 
does not have all the answers. This is deeply annoying to the sixth line and in those moments when the 
intuition cannot do that, there is this anger about tomorrow. 

Some people go through life angry about what tomorrow is going to be. Here is somebody who is not 
afraid of tomorrow. They are angry and frustrated that they have to deal with tomorrow. They are looking 
for the One-NightStand. They are looking for the magic. They are looking for something very special and 
their intuition cannot always give them that. 

These people are very likely to stop paying attention to their intuitive system. They easily deny that they 
have an intuition. They will tell you that it is their mind. I tell people with the sixth line, "You have a very 
good intuition," and they answer, "Yes, but it is my thinking." They have no idea where this is coming 
from because there is this sense of frustration that the intuition cannot guide them to the Holy Grail that 
all sixth lines are looking for. 

When you get to the next step for this sixth line, it is the 32nd hexagram first line: A life sustaining 
respect to all aspects of a process, the line of Conservation, to not be a failure. What the sixth line is 
ultimately looking towards is an intuition that will never fail it. That is why they get so angry and 
frustrated because the intuition will fail you. Your mind will fail you too. Your emotions will fail you. We 
are limited. 

HEXAGRAM 58 THE JOYOUS 

We are looking at the left side of the root center. Here, we have the root center going over to the splenic 
side. We have the original pressures that fuel our most basic awareness. The splenic system is the most 
fundamental awareness. It is our first awareness, our spontaneous existential awareness, our health 
system. The moment that you look at the splenic system in terms of the capacity of our immune or 
lymphatic system to keep us clean, to keep us alive, to keep us healthy, then these three pressures that 
exist in the root center are of enormous importance to the well-being of what it is to be human. 

When you are moving from the root to the solar plex, the underlying theme beyond the obvious is sexual. 
When you are moving from the root center to the splenic, what you have beyond the obvious themes is 
caring. You have a totally different dimension here in terms of the pressure. It is the pressure to be aware, 
not the pressure to emote, not the pressure to release the emotional wave. It is the pressure to care and not 
the pressure to sexually bond. So it is a different process. 

In looking at the 58th gate, it is important to see that understanding, in the Human Design sense (the 
understanding circuit, the logical system), is universal in life. All life is dependent on order and patterns. 
These things must exist and we see that the understanding process of the logical circuitry is in all different 
forms of life. There is a great irony in the nature of what it is to be human. It is very easy for us to live out 
the experiential wave (the 36 is a motor gate going directly to the throat) but it is not so easy to manifest 
logical awareness. 

One of the most difficult things for human beings to be able to do is to manifest understanding. It is 
obvious when you look at the nature of the circuitry. The three logical gates that come out of the throat 
have no direct access to energy. If you go down the process of the channel of Talent, you come the 18/58 
and to the 58th gate. You come to the gate that is there to fuel the whole logical process, not in the sense 
of the format energy, but in the sense that this is the pure pressure to bring out experimentation. When 
you look at the 58th gate, recognize deeply what that energy is. It is a highly specialized energy available 
for logical experimentation to ensure a safe future for humanity. 

The 58th gate is there to provide a unique energy. It permits repetitive experimentation and without this 
energy, we would not test the formulas. Without this energy, we will never know for sure that a pattern is 
legitimate and can be of value to the totality. That is why the first line of the 58 is one of the loveliest 
lines in the I'Ching. This is the true beauty of life. Real love is the recognition of a pattern that provides 
security for the totality. This is collective love as a fuel that sits in the 58. It is the gate of vitality, the 
vitality or not. The Joyous is a beautiful name for the hexagram. The vitality is the energy to experiment. 
It is not aware. It is the life force which is focused on providing this energy for experimentation. 

58.1 Love of life 

The first line always gives you the foundation, the true nature of the hexagram. Here this line has the 
name Love of Life. 

Venus exalted. The very stimulation of the world is the basis of an aesthetic appreciation of its beauty and 
wonder. Alone or shared with others, this profound inner realization is the key for a joyous harmony with 
the process of being. How nice) The Moon in detriment is the very same thing, only that it is inconsistent. 
The Moon will bring phases in which this love of life is there. Please keep in mind that this is not aware. 
The energy is literally the fuel of vitality. This is the energy that says, "Being alive is great," but the risks 
in life are terrible. Without this vitality, this pure love for what it is just to be filled with life itself, there is 
not sufficient energy to deal with correction. This is the fuel for the channel of Judgment. This is all about 
the fuel to challenge authority, and the love of life is to challenge any authority in which the pattern is 

incorrect. Because it is so difficult to bring logic to manifestation, this energy is so stimulated by life (the 
other side) that it really has within it the potential to offer this energy so that correction can take place. 

Most frustrating for 58's is when there is no 18, to recognize within oneself that there is this energy of this 
vitality to get life to work, to get the pattern right, but no idea where to put the energy. There is no place 
to put the energy. That can be very frustrating. 

In the white book: The energy which fuels the love of life; or A cyclical energy which intermittently fuels 
the love of life. It is very important to see clearly that this energy is essential. If you are involved in any 
kind of logical work, not to have an 18/58 around is going to make it very difficult to go beyond the 
'talking' stage to the 'doing' stage. Without this energy, logic gets caught in philosophical debate. We get a 
committee to study a certain proposal and a subcommittee to study a sub-proposal and the sub- 
subcommittee to study the proposals of the committees, and a financial committee to study the possibility 
of that committee to function properly. 

There is no 58 that says, "Here is the energy. Let's go and try it." Everyone who is involved in a logical 
process, who does not have the 58, is crying for the same thing. "If you only give me the money, I will 
show you that it works." Money is just energy. All logical people are running around saying, "Hey, look, 
if you finance this project, it will work." They are all desperate for that energy. That is why we have this 
enormous number of committees. We only have one gate that brings this possibility to truly experiment 
and to see clearly that something can work, and that the challenge of authority has been valid. 

This first line is the essence of what it is to make sure that humanity will have a viable future. There is no 
viable future without this deep love for the process itself, but this energy points at fear. It is pointed at the 
awareness that is rooted deeply in fear. The fear that life will fail, that it will not work, that we will be 
overwhelmed by the broken patterns that will destroy us, that an authority that is misinformed or poorly 
devised will control us and that it is not going to work. So this vitality needs to have its outlet, in order for 
experimentation to take place. 

58.2 Perversion 

Throughout my work in Design I discovered that there are so many people who read lines and find the 
subject of the lines very uncomfortable and think that their client will find the subject very uncomfortable 
too. They are really afraid to say anything and they are trying to figure out how to make it nice in order to 
not to offend their client. The first thing to understand about that is that the moment you think a line is 
negative, you (not your client) have a problem because lines are positive and negative, like all things. It is 
the way it is always going to be. The moment that you cannot see that there is another side, you are not 
seeing it clearly. 

The second thing is that if you have a line which is uncomfortable and you tell your client about this 
uncomfortable line, they will just nod their head because it is them. They know that. It is not that you 
shock them. The fact of the matter is that if you do a reading and you only give people the bad stuff, they 
are very happy. If you only give them the good stuff, they think that there is something wrong. Most 
human beings think that everything about them is at fault somewhere, and they are very happy to have 
negative aspects that they can project on. 

Let's look at a classic line, Perversion. We have our prejudices that are alive in the Maya through 
language, only through language. This is where our prejudices live in all things. Because we are binary 
and dualistic, we are designed to be prejudiced to be this or that. This is our nature. Understand that a 
term like 'perversion' carries with it a heavy negative framework. We have given the word 'perverse' an 

exclusively sleazy sexual connotation. This is part of what we have done to make this word 
uncomfortable. 

We know what second lines are all about. They project outwards. The 58.2 is projecting outwards, "I have 
the energy to enjoy giving this energy to any challenge of authority and any logical experiment." What 
this energy is given to can appear to be very perverse to a lot people. 

I have a friend who was with the German network television for forty years and he made his living doing 
documentaries, and he has the 58.2. During his reading, I got to the 58.2 and told him that this is the line 
of perversion and he started to giggle. He said: "Have you ever seen my documentaries?" He did what 
was considered a fine documentary on Joseph Beuys, who is pretty perverse himself. He loved it. He did 
not want to do documentaries about ordinary people that everybody was interested in. Once he was 
offered to do a documentary on a German politician and he refused it because he considered it boring. He 
was open to giving this energy, to projecting out that he would give energy, to anything because that is 
what the second line is all about. It is always ready to project out its capacity. The 58.2 says, "I will 
provide energy for any kind of process." What happens to these people is that they get offered a lot of 
weird things because they project out that they are open to anything. 

Sometimes they are paper tigers and they do not go through with it; they don't really like giving their 
joyous energy for that. Due to the projection, they often (logical people are desperate for that energy) get 
all kinds of people that never had access to energy before because they do not meet 58.2's every day. 
Thus, the 58.2 ends up providing their energy for unusual different forms of challenge to authority. 

It is our social morals because the collective stream is deeply moralistic. It knows what is right and 
wrong. This is a judgmental channel and, therefore, these people get judged as being perverse. Why do 
you give your energy to buy shoes, when you can feed starving babies? It is not about making a judgment 
about these people because they have this line. The moment that you explain to them what it is doing, 
telling them, "You are projecting out that your energy is available, and you get all kinds of people that 
bring strange things for you to put your energy to," they understand that because that is what their life has 
been about. 

Many of them get hooked on that because they get the outlet, they get their opportunity to see their energy 
move through. All the other logical people that are not getting access to energy start making judgments 
and say, "Why did you do that? You could do this and that with me. Why are you so perverse? I need 
your energy to do this that is so healthy and logical." Don't get caught up in being judgmental about the 
name of a line. Just see it for what it is. There are some great creative forces that are rooted in the 58.2. 
Without them, the collective would be very poor. We would only have committees for building roads. 

58.3 Electricity 

When we get to the third line, we get to the end of the lower trigram and to the line of trial and error. We 
know that it is a learning process, a moving process. The line is called Electricity. Uranus exalted. The 
individual whose electric vitality creates its own stimulation and is not dependent on others. 

If you look above the lines it says: Stimulation is the key to joy. The stimulation comes from being able to 
release the energy and challenge authority: only then, which means that, in the first three lines, it is 
always difficult because they do not really know that there is something on the other side. They just have 
this energy within them. 

The Uranian aspect of this is: The energy to fuel independent stimulation. These are people that won't 
give you access to this energy to experiment, unless it is their experiment. They are not aware. They don't 
really know that there is another side and that the awareness is at the other side. 

There are so many people like that. You have somebody who has a lot of resources, such as wealth, and 
they have somebody who comes to them and says, "I have this great idea. Could you help me out?" Even 
if it is a great idea for them, they will say "No. I have my own idea that I am working on." In other words, 
they want to do their own thing. They make a lot of mistakes that way because this is a collective process 
and logic is deeply interdependent in its collectivity. It is essential. 

On the other side of this line is Mars in detriment. The quality of fire is dependent on its fuel and subject 
to its influence, good or bad. Here you can see where immaturity has a value. Because this is the 
immature aspect of this line, they end up being dependent on others anyway, to be able to get it out. They 
have to. 

The energy for aliveness that is dependent on others for stimulation. They recognize very early that they 
can't get it out without others. The exalted, the Uranian side, is stubborn about that. It wants to do its own 
thing. Every time that you are looking at logic, remember that logic's expression from the G center to the 
throat is called The Alpha. Because The Alpha is intrinsic in the logical process, built into this third line is 
an essential element that says, "Even though we have a collective, it still must be lead by an Alpha. The 

58.3 exalted wants to be an Alpha. It does not simply want to be the one who is the follower who provides 
the energy. It wants to be the Alpha that leads. 

58.4 Focusing 

The fourth and fifth lines in the upper trigram are inherently social. That is, they are well aware that there 
is a gate at the other end of the channel. When you come to the fourth line, which is a line of 
externalization, we have a very fixed energy and the line is appropriately titled Focusing. It is a pure focus 
of this energy available for experimentation. Whenever you deal with the 58, always think of it as the 
energy for experimentation. Ultimately it is all about that. It is important to keep that in mind. The energy 
is really for being able to experiment with a pattern that challenges authority, but nonetheless, a pattern 
that must be supported through this energy. 

Here we have Pluto exalted. A natural specialization that when confronted with a multiplicity of 
stimulation will have no inner difficulty in focusing on the appropriate influence. It is quite obvious. In 
other words, these people being unidirectional, with their single-mindedness, have the ability in them to 
energize or to bring about experimentation but in a very fixed, limited, narrow way. They do not want to 
give their energy to this or that challenge of authority; they are very clear that it has to go in one direction. 

In the white book: The energy to fuel recognition of which stimulation is of value. "I don't want to give 
my energy to that." It is not like the third line saying, "This is my thing." This is simply willingness to 
give its energy to the appropriate pattern, to the appropriate experimentation. 

Neptune in detriment. An impressionability that becomes confused with a multiplicity of stimulations and 
in trying to accommodate all of it becomes unstable. This is obvious for any fourth line. If you have a 
fourth-line mind, if you are trying to juggle eight or nine different mental processes, you will become 
mentally unstable because fourth lines are about being fixed and about being single -tracked and one- 
minded. The only way in which that externalization can take place is if it is fixed in that way. 

When you come to the detriment of this line, there is so much pressure on the people who have this 
pressure gate to provide their energy to relieve their pressure. There is enormous pressure on 58's because 

the logic system starves for energy. The people with the detriment get suddenly overwhelmed because so 
many people want to get access to their energy and in trying to go from here to there, back and forth, they 
become unstable. They do not become mentally unstable; they become physically sick. This energy is 
pointed towards the splenic system. 

Look carefully at the fourth lines that you have and be very clear what a fourth line is saying to you. It 
tells you that you have to have a single focus, a single track. That is what keeps a fourth line healthy. 

58.5 Defense 

The fifth line is always being projected on. Due to that, it represents how society, how a culture as a 
whole will look at this particular hexagram. It is interesting enough to see that this line is called Defense. 
People are always projecting onto the 58.5 that they have the energy to provide a stimulation, that they 
have the energy that can bring about the experimentation. Because of that, they are approached a lot. 

Moon exalted. The natural and practical instinct to protect oneself, regardless of temptations. Built into 
the genetic material of this fifth line (remember that fifth lines are lines of universalization) is the 
recognition that only those experiments that can be universalized are worthy of one's energy. Otherwise, 
they are not. 

In the white book: The fuel for self-defense, regardless of stimulations. Self-defense is really about 
fending people off who are trying to tap into that energy. 

Sun in detriment. The assumption that the best defense is a good offense that might allow strength of 
character to enjoy questionable stimulus without succumbing to it. Or, in terms of the white book: The 
energy for aliveness which forsakes self-defense and will embrace questionable stimulations. There is 
always this risk for 58's that something is so interesting as a stimulation (this is the resonance to 
Perversion) that they will give up their self-defense and try it. That never means that the results of that 
will be bad. It does not. It is not about that. It simply is a mechanism. After all, it is a fifth line. Whether it 
is working this way or that way, both ways have value because everything that can be experimented with 
is of value in the end to all of us. That is why we have a scientific community that spreads across the 
world and that has millions and millions of people involved in all different kinds of experimentation. 
Ultimately, the totality benefits from the availability of all of that knowledge and all of that affirmation of 
what kind of patterns work or not. 

The thing to recognize about the 58.5 is that it will fend people off and say, "No." There is all this 
projection on them saying, "They are the ones that can give you the juice you need." So they learn very 
early. Remember what it is to be a 58.5 child and have projected on you that you are the one that has the 
energy to get things fixed and corrected, experimented with. You can get into all kinds of stuff that is not 
for you. 

The terms 'exalted' and 'detriment' do not mean anything. They just say that there are two sides. The plan 
is logical. Our genetic code is logical. The binary process of evolution is logical, the logic that generates 
patterns which are all by their very nature hierarchical. This is one of the things to understand about what 
the logical collective process is for us. That is what establishes the hierarchy in life. It literally establishes 
how the hierarchy works in the sense that, when you see that the identity comes out of the Alpha, you also 
have to realize that that is a binary which consists of a leader and a follower. That binary exists in 
everything, whether it is the parent and the child, or the employer and the employee. Wherever you are 
looking, we have hierarchical structures that are built into your pattern process. It is inherent in that. 

58.6 Carried Away 

When you come to the sixth line, you come to the resonance to the third line, and what we saw in 
Electricity was that there is a built-in Alpha field. The exalted says, "I want to be the leader," and the 
other side of that is, "I have to give my energy anyway, so I will be a follower, just to get my energy out." 
These are the two sides of the third line. They are not about good or bad. When you come to the sixth 
line, to the potential of wisdom, to the transition, to what is beyond, it is looking to the whole circuit. It 
says, " 1 am looking at the whole circuit and therefore I will not give my energy to anything other than 
what is going to be experimented with and proved, to what will become part of the pattern and the flow of 
society and the format, the focus, of how we operate, and that is something that society is going to be led 
into, guided by their leaders." That is quite a vision. 

Here we have Carried away. The Moon exalted. The tendency to practicality that while thoroughly 
enjoying external stimulation has the instinct to draw back when its independent integrity is threatened. 
Here is your classic sixth line that says, "No, why should I give my energy to that kind of experiment? I 
will only waste my money and my time." 

When you are looking at the lunar side, The energy to fuel independent integrity that will maintain its 
identity in times of stimulation, you are looking at, "I will only involve my energy in this correction, in 
this challenge, in this experiment, if I am the alpha, if I can maintain my independent integrity. I am not 
going to be a follower. If I am a follower, I will not be involved. So don't ask me for anything unless you 
want my money to build a business. That is okay, but I have to be the boss. Otherwise, I will not give you 
the money." 

You come to the Mercury in detriment: When its basic intelligence is effectively stimulated, its natural 
desire for attunement will lead it to identify so strongly with the stimulation, that it is at risk of losing is 
identity. When people read this line and come to 'losing one's identity', they get very nervous. It is okay. It 
is not bad. If we did not have these people, we would have no dedication. 

It is essential that we also have this other side: The energy which fuels loss of identity in times of 
stimulation. That leads to the identification that ends up being what we call skills. The 16th gate at the top 
of this stream is the great gate of Identification. If you cannot identify with your art, you are not an artist. 
In the East they always say, "Do not identifyl" Well, in Human Design we say, "Don't identify with 
identification." But the identification is there. This stream is about identification. If you really manage to 
stimulate a 58.6, they will give up everything for the cause. They will give up everything for the 
experiment, for that identification because that leads to great art and great changes in all kinds of things. 
But to get the 58.6 on either side, the leader or the follower side, to actually commit their energy, that is 
another story. Like all sixth lines, they are standing back and saying, "Yes, but my energy is only for that 
experiment that is truly going to be productive, and that truly is of benefit to society." 

Both sides of the sixth line, whether they are the leader or the follower, are essential ingredients because 
they will bring mutation to the logical collective. When they commit themselves to something, that is a 
very important commitment of energy but do not count on them to do that. They are not the 58.2 that is 
standing there and saying, "I am ready. What do you want? You need energy for this or that?" That is not 
the sixth line. 

See clearly that built into everything that is logical, built into its very energy is this division between 
those who lead and those who follow. It is always there because this is where the hierarchy is empowered. 
A final thing to remember about the 58th gate: you have only two fuel gates for the logical process out of 
the root center, the 52 and the 58. They are in opposition in the zodiac and they are part of the same cross. 
This is a very powerful force that operates through this polarity. You have to clearly see the importance of 

the 58. It has to be encouraged to participate in the logical process. There is no question about that. We 
need their energy in order to properly, and in a healthy way, challenge authority. 

HEXAGRAM 59 DISPERSION 

We are now looking at two gates which are of considerable importance in our lives because they 
condition so much of our behavior. In the Rave chart, we have six different gates that are gates of roles. 
We have four role gates that come out of the G center: the 13, the 1, the 7, and the 10, and we have two 
role gates that come out %J the sacral center. This center acts as our genetic role generator. It is very 
important to understand that genetic roles are about what is necessary to satisfy the genetic need. It has 
nothing to do with the essence of the person, their mind or their feelings. It simply has to do with the 
genes themselves having their own imperative. 

As you will see, when we are looking at both the 59th gate and the 27th gate, we are looking at genetic 
strategies. They do not describe the person. They describe a role. It is very important to keep that in mind 
when you are looking at role gates. Role gates never describe the person, but only the role. 

These two gates out of the sacral center connect on either side to mechanisms that have a deep impact on 
our lives. The waves and the frequencies impact on us. The sixth gate is the solar plex center gate which 
generates what we call the emotional wave: six different archetypes of the emotional waves. The 50th 
hexagram in the splenic system generates six different awareness frequencies. 

These waves and frequencies operate through the lines and because of that, the wave that exists in the first 
line is going to be something that has a resonance to all other first and fourth lines. We have been looking 
at all of these different lines and we have gone through enough hexagrams now that you have this sense 
of what each of these steps is, from the one to the six. 

The thing to recognize is that these roles have a resonance. Every first line which sets the foundation and 
is introspective resonates to the role of pursuer and pursued. Every second line resonates to the wave of 
shyness/boldness. Think about the second line. It is projecting something out but it does not necessarily 
have any way of dealing with somebody who is coining at it. The shy-strategy is projecting all kinds of 
sexuality but still acting out the shyness role and bringing boldness into its life. Each of these roles has a 
resonance in each of these lines, and it does not matter whether you translate that sexually or mentally. 

All third lines are about bonds made and broken. That is the sexual role of coming together and going 
apart. It is also a role, as we have seen, that exists as a resonance in all third lines, where mistakes can be 
made as part of the process of trial and error. The role of the fourth line is the role of the confidante or 
not. This is all about friendship. This is all about being focused, one-directionally in just being able to 
externalize and make friends. The fifth line is the role of the seducer and the seduced. We have seen how 
the fifth line gets projected on. This one is a seducer. When you get to the sixth line and you get to the 
soul mate or not, you get to the theme of all sixth lines which is, "If it is not going to be the most 
wonderful thing in the world, why bother?" 

When we look here at the lines of the 59th gate, keep in mind that underneath lie these quintessential roles 
and they are strategy roles, and understand the nature of strategy. If you have somebody who has, for 
example, the fourth line, confidante or not, what that strategy is saying genetically is, "You are going to 
be restricted in your role to making friends with somebody before you can ever have a chance to make 
love to them." Not only is it saying that that will be the strategy, but what it is also saying is, "If you go 
through that process and first you make friends with that person and then finally become their lover, the 
child that you can produce is the right genetic combination because it is a genetic strategy. " It is not that 
the person themselves like that. I know so many people that have the 59.4, and they are always 
complaining about how it is impossible for them to have a one-night-stand, how it is impossible for them 
to meet somebody and just dissolve into a relationship. They have to go through this process. By being 

somebody's friend first, you have to hear about their lovers and their problems. You have to go through 
all that crap before you can finally get to the point of, "Okay, it is our turn now." 

It is just a strategy. It is not the being. Do not confuse roles with the being. What happens to us is that 
most of us who have produced children look around at the person we have produced the children with and 
say "Why?" The reality is that what our genetics demand, what our genetic say is necessary to produce a 
viable genetic mix for the next generation, may not be what your mind likes, may not be what your heart 
likes, may not be what your identity likes. This is so important when it comes to understanding resonance. 
Through resonance you can really see how you can work those things out in relationships by knowing 
how to meet people through the resonance. That is another story entirely. Anyway, these six roles 
underline the 59th hexagram. 

Above the lines of the 59th hexagram it says: The ability to break down barriers in order to achieve union. 
Every single one of these roles is designed to break down barriers. These are genetic strategies. They 
know exactly how to work. They have this ability to break down barriers. That is what they are there for. 

59.1 The Preemptive Strike 

Every single hexagram (and this is very funny but also sad, but it is how things work) is expressed as an 
essence through its first line. The first line is a foundation. Here we have the foundation of The 
Preemptive strike. 

The authority and vitality that in understanding purpose and direction, can recognize and eliminate 
barriers before they become impregnable. 'Preemptive strike' is a military term. It means that you get 
them before they get you. It also means: You get them before anybody else does. This is what I call the 
caveman line. You know these pictures of the caveman. He sees a beautiful woman, he takes out his club, 
racks her on the head and grabs her by her hair and drags her off to his cave. It is one of the things to 
understand about the nature of human union. The foundation of human union is that the strong 
overwhelms the weak. This is the nature of the basis of the union. It is why women of your generation 
living in this time in the world are confronted with so much hostility the moment that you assert strength 
rather than living out the archetype, the stereotype of yin weakness. This is all about the strong 
overwhelming the weak. 

Mercury in detriment. In this position, the ability and intelligence to recognize, but a deep indecisiveness 
about how and when to act. This is a first line and because of that, it knows that it is fertile. It knows that 
it has the power to break down a barrier but it does not really know very much about the other side, like 
all first lines. Think about something else. Think about the nature of resonance. When I was doing the 
sexual course, people were always saying to me: What about the mind? I did the sexuality which came 
out of the solar plex, and the caring which came out of the splenic. The sexuality of the mind is in 
resonance to wherever the sexuality is. For example, let's say that you are somebody who has a mind that 
has a dominance of first lines. The way your mind is going to operate sexually, what your mind is going 
to think about partnership, is that it will think about it in this way. It is going to be 'the caveman 
mentality.' It is going to be: when I am strong and they are weak, I can get them. That is the nature of the 
first line. 

It also tells you something very intrinsic about how the human blood line, genetics, survives. It survives 
by the strong and the weak coming together, not the stereotype of strong and weak but the truth of strong 
and weak. This is the basis of keeping the genetic pool alive because if the weak are left to the weak, their 
offspring becomes weaker and weaker and eventually die off. This whole business is that the first line can 
look like violation at one level: there is physical and psychic rape in the first line. There is violation in the 
first line simply because the strong can be overwhelmed in their strength, and the weak can be so weak. 

There can be this enormous imposition of this power on them, but at its core is the protection of the 
species. At the core is this underlying tribal support system that says, "We cannot leave the weak out 
there. We have to integrate the weak with the strong, so that the next generation is healthier." Not to allow 
the weak to continue reproducing without strength. The basis of union is strength and weakness. 

Comment by Jurgen: When the male is doing his dance to attract the woman, when he shows himself to 
overcome the barriers, there is a certain moment where the genetics are right and the woman says, "I got 
so weak." They call that the weakness of the heart. This is a classic syndrome of spring fever. 

59.2 Shyness 

When you are dealing with the first line, you know that they have the recognition that they can break 
down barriers. It is like all foundations. It is introspective, and so it recognizes that within it is the power 
to break down barriers. When you get to the second line, you get to projection and of course, they do not 
know that they can break down barriers. That is just what they project out, but they do not know it 
themselves. So there is no movement from them. It is what we call shyness, but it is not shyness. 

The 'self-imposed barriers' at the beginning of this line are a genetic barrier. This is not like they self- 
impose this from their mental plane. This is a genetic barrier that is there. It is a self-imposed barrier. 
They are not allowed, in that sense, to live out that first line. They have to wait for that to come to them 
because they are projecting that outwards. 

Shyness. Self-imposed barriers. A preferred and natural separateness that protects against the inevitable 
instability engendered by union. Now, remember that the second lines are always getting found out. In 
that moment that they are projecting outwards and somebody picks up that projection and comes into 
them with their boldness, they may find that very uncomfortable. After all, it is not necessarily something 
that is going to work. It can or it cannot. It is part of the process. 

In the Shyness line: The restriction of the sex drive to maintain separateness. It is a way of keeping 
oneself back so that one does not have to deal with what happens. The first to the third line is not well 
equipped to deal with the other side. They are involved in their own process, and yet this is a channel that 
is all about intimacy. There is always an aspect within them that is very uncomfortable because they have 
to deal with the power of the other side because the other side brings the emotional wave. It brings the 
passion and the desire. It brings the up and down of the power. This can be quite a thing to deal with. 

Pluto in detriment. There is a whole generation of people that have Pluto affecting this 59th hexagram, 
people somewhere around 1957-1960. A calculated shyness, rooted in deep psychological barriers, that 
even in dynamic individuals will always resist interaction. These are extreme cases of people in whom 
only boldness will work. Only when someone consistently is coming to break down that barrier can it 
possibly work. This is a deep genetic restriction. When you see someone with the 59.2 in detriment, what 
that says basically is: there are very few people that are their genetic match. Because of that, they can be 
very uncomfortable in that role of being the shy one and they assume that there is something wrong. 
There is nothing wrong. There are only very few people to make that match. 

Infertiliy, rooted psychologically or biologically, that conditions the drive for separateness. The infertility 
lies in the incapacity to be able to initiate union themselves. They cannot break anything down 
themselves. If nobody comes to break it down, it will never get broken down. It does not matter what kind 
of lover they have, until they are getting the right one, until they are getting the right kind of boldness, the 
right genetic mix, there can be no fertility for these people. I have many women I worked with who have 
the 59.2 in detriment, because it is a generation I have a lot of contact with. So many of them are 

concerned that they are truly infertile, that it is not possible for them to have children. It is difficult but it 
is not impossible. The reality is that is has to do with the right genetic mix. Without it, it does not happen. 

By the way, when you get to the fifth line, the line of universalization, you get to what we have in the 
modem world: the enormous expansion of genetic mixes so that people who are limited in that sense no 
longer have to stay limited. They would have been the ones in the old tribe that would have been the 
spinsters, or the men without children. They would have been the ones that never had children within the 
confines of the tribe because they did not get to meet enough in the world, to meet exactly that right 
genetic mix that is going to be able to produce that genetic material. 

59.3 Openness 

When we get to the third line, to the line of Openness, we get to the line of bonds made and broken. So 
many people misunderstand this because they put an awful lot of attention on the 'broken' instead of the 
'made'. Bonds made and broken is a genetic strategy to be very open, to achieve union and then to close 
up. That is all. That is the way bonds made and broken works. Bonds made and broken can be a couple 
which does not see each other for a long period of time, and then they come back together again, then 
they separate again. Or somebody who works every day and does not see the partner all day and after 
work, they come back together again. This kind of bonds made and broken can work at many different 
levels. The thing to understand about this is that this is a genetic imperative that says, "We are going to 
have this moment," Remember, this is the resonance to the real One -night-stand, and the three says, 
"Come on, let's do it. Let's try, and tomorrow I don't want to see you anymore." That is the nature of 
bonds made and broken. 

Openness. Where one is empowered through union and intimacy with others, and the other side: Where 
the drive for empowerment can lead to promiscuity. Remember that this is about adaptation. It is saying: 
The search for identity and security can only be achieved through the dropping of barriers, in order to 
define oneself through union. This is the ultimate idea of what union is: to let go, to dissolve yourself into 
a relationship, to define yourself in that union. By defining yourself in that union, to generate, in the 
ultimate sense, the genetic material that can come out of it, but that's it. It does not mean that that 
relationship is meant to survive. It does not mean that this union is meant to survive. It means that that is 
exactly the right strategy to produce the genetic material that will come out of it. 

The women of the generation of 1957-1960 are an enormous generation of single mothers. They are all 
running around saying, "Why do I have this child with that man, and he is gone?" Sometimes the man is 
carrying the third line, and sometimes they carry it. But the moment that that is there, it is reflected and 
lived out and that is part of the process. 

The whole bulge in the divorce rate comes from this kind of energy. The thing to recognize about it is that 
it is not inherently bad. It is not about that. It is literally about defining yourself through union and then 
saying, "Excuse me, but I want to go back to being by myself for a while, okay?" That is really what it is 
saying. It is saying, "I am defining myself through union with you because we can produce something 
here. That is what the genes want, but I don't necessarily want to stay with you. My genes are just 
interested in this experience, to produce this possibility, not necessarily that we are going to stay 
together." 

Third lines can always bring in the whole process of trial and error. This is the nature of the promiscuity, 
that is, the sense that in defining oneself, it does not last. If one is not psychologically balanced or one 
does not have a proper kind of understanding, you keep on going through this process endlessly, trying to 
define yourself through somebody else and constantly going through this breaking down of the bond, and 
thinking finally that all of this is just pointless. 

59.4 Brotherhood/Sisterhood 

When you get to the fourth line, you get to the upper trigram and you get to this process of 
externalization, of being fixed. After all, this whole hexagram is about establishing union. It is not about 
establishing a good sex life. It is not about establishing having children. The overview of that is to 
establish union. The fourth line is fixed on establishing union. It is fixed on establishing friendship. 
Friendship becomes the focus for everybody who carries this line. 

Think about what that means. If you have a mind that is fourth line dominated, the only people that will 
ever pay attention to your mind are your friends. Otherwise it is not going to work. It is all about finding 
the confidante, or not. The fourth line is fixed on this. 

Venus exalted. The dropping of barriers to union to establish a universal union. Mercury in detriment. An 
intellectual understanding that is rarely put into action. In the white book: The power derived from non- 
sexual intimacy. The power is, "Aha, I broke down their barrier. If I try to come at them as a lover, they 
would have rejected me. But I got them. I came in the back door as their friend and I did it." That is the 
power. 

The other side is that, underneath that power, the idea "I broke through, I am their friend now," is not 
enough because it cannot restrain the sex drive. One of the things that happen is that the fourth line 
operates in a wave of kindness and meanness. That kindness is always at work in the friendship phase and 
the meanness is always coming into work the moment that you step into the sexual phase. That is, you 
have a friend for many years and you have a sweet and wonderful relationship and one night you make 
love to each other and the next day you are not very nice to each other anymore. You know too much 
about each other because you have been friends. The moment you become lovers, that is a totally 
different story. Lovers need to have secrets. Friends can't afford to have secrets. This is the other side of 
this. 

The other thing is to keep something in mind on the level of sexual violation that takes place in the world: 
most women are raped by men they know. They are raped by men who are in their families. They are 
raped by friends. The fourth line is the resonance to the first line and it is still about weakness and 
strength, but at another level. At the moment that you know somebody for a very long time, there is often 
this moment that you really can be overpowered by them and there is always this sexual tone that 
underlies all friendship. Be aware of that. 

The moment that somebody is operating on the friendship level does not mean that there is not sexuality 
within them. It means that they are working out an operating strategy and ultimately, by the time they get 
to a certain point, they get to live out the sexuality. It usually turns out that they say, "Why couldn't we 
have stayed friends?" There is also complete sexual rejection in this line. There are also people who have 
this line who become brothers and sisters in monasteries. Or there are people with this line who only want 
someone to cuddle. They only want to feel the warmth of the friendship. 

59.5 The Femme Fatale or Casanova 

We have union, we have sexuality. It is very rare in the 384 lines that you see the word 'love'. If you look 
for it, you will discover that it is not easy to find. If you look here in the fifth line, right away it stands out 
there. It is the only one of these lines that speaks of love. This is the universalization of union and that is 
why we have love movies, love stories and love poetry. Union really is the caveman but what we want is 
it to be much more exalted. We want Romeo and Juliet. This is the projection that the world puts on 
union. The fifth line carries it out. 

This is one of the lines that are deeply misunderstood because of its name, The Femme Fatale or 
Casanova. The easiest way to understand this is that it is the other that is projecting onto this person that 
they can break down the union. They are the ones that can make it work. So what happens to the fifth line 
is that they are the ones that get loved. They attract all of the love that gets projected on them. Remember, 
they may not be very good as lovers. It is simply a projection, but it is coming from the outside and says, 
"Aha, this one. This is the one that will break down the barrier." They may or may not. It is very easy for 
them to become the femme fatale or the Casanova because people love them but they do not necessarily 
love. This is one of the dilemmas. 

This is one of the common things that you see in literature. We see this endless stream of somebody who 
loves somebody else and that person does not love them. This is the classic theme of the fifth line. The 
fifth line is always attracting love but it does not mean that they love back. It simply means that they are 
attracting that love. 

The power to use love to break down any barrier. Given the Sun's 'lightness,' there is no negative 
connotation inherent in this description. Uranus in detriment. Here the negative potential of this power 
becomes evident. The gigolo, the adventuress. "If they love me, why don't they pay? It is okay with me. If 
they love me, let them take me to Monte Carlo. Let me gamble, let me have a good time, dress me up in 
nice clothes." Every time you are looking at fifth lines, you really get to see the way the world looks at 
these energies. You can see that it is not the whole story. It is the mythology that we put out. The fifth line 
is always carrying that global mythology. 

59.6 The One Night Stand 

When we come to the sixth line, the line of transition, we come to the end of this process. This line is 
called The One night stand. I already mentioned that this line is deeply misunderstood. The One night 
stand, though it is clearly the resonance to the bonds made and broken of the third line, so there is always 
the potential for this kind of sexuality, it is the resonance above that. All sixth lines have within them this 
sense of the soul mate, or not. This is all about, "Yes, I know how to do it. I know I can do it with you, 
but so what? Where is that going to take me? Where am I going to go with all of that?" 

Remember that the sixth line is always looking at the complete circuit and when you take a look at this 
circuitry, you are basically looking at what it is to be a member of the tribe. Oh, then the six stands back 
and says, "Wait a minute. I know what this is all about. This is about children, houses, mortgages, the job 
I have to have, the neighborhood I have to live in, the friends my kid has to have, the government that 
runs the city. And you want me to get involved with you, tonight when I have to think about all of that? 
No. This is not worth it." 

In the black book: The tendency, based on the personality or circumstances, to accept only temporary 
unions that may otherwise be impossible or dangerous to continue. Because it is not going to lead to 
where that sixth line wants to go. It wants to go to the 45th gate that says: "I have. I want. I have what I 
need." If it cannot say that, it is not going to be involved at all. 

The power for intimacy, regardless of conditions. The power is always there, but that does not mean that 
it will be used. On the other side of that: The drive for sexual and intimate diversity. By the way, if you 
meet a 59.6 and you watch them in a cafe, you see what this line means. They are watching everything 
that moves: every muscle, every tone, every shape. It is not that they do anything about it; they are 
looking at everything and thinking, "Maybe." So don't be carried away with seeing this as somebody who 
is driven by their sexuality to step into union. They know all that stuff but there is a much deeper sense 
of: what else is there? 

When you move in this gate to the next line, the 40. 1 , you move deep into the tribe. You go to the part of 
the tribe that has to work it all out, that has to provide the ego energy to support the family, to make the 
marriage bargain, to do all of those things. The thing that the 59.6 knows is that the next step ("God 
forbidl" says the 59.6.) is the 40.1. "The moment I make this step, I will have to play out that whole 
movie starting at the 40th hexagram." They are not going to do that unless they really see that this is 
something unusual for them: the soul mate or not. 

By the way, in terms of resonance: If you see someone who has the 59.6 and who has many third lines in 
their design, they are more likely to experiment early in their life with all kinds of short term relationships 
until they get to the point where they realize, "Oh, I have to wait." Resonance has a lot to do with how we 
function, and where the resonance is to these things. 

HEXAGRAM 60 LIMITATION 

One of the format energies. Every time I have to deal with the 3rd hexagram, I would like to spend six or 
seven days talking about it because it is an incredible thing. Anybody who has the 60th hexagram has a 
deep connection to the whole mutative process that exists through the 3. This format energy generates the 
whole mutative field. The thing to recognize is that the 3rd gate is the most mutative gate because it 
orders what will become new. It is like a pool of material, all of which has a mutative potential. It is all of 
the mutative potential that is rooted in the whole history of the individual process. It goes all the way 
back. In the mystical sense, the 3rd gate always represents what is new and the 60th gate represents 
what is old. 

The Limitation is what has always been up to this pulse. If it could speak, this would be its mantra. "This 
is what has always been up to this pulse, up to this moment." Then there is the pulse; when it comes back 
through the 3, something new may emerge out of what was the limitation. The 60 carries within it a very 
special value, and we are living through the 60 energy for the last couple of years (1995-1999) with 
Uranus and Neptune in this gate. It means that the genetic pool, all the possibility for mutation in the 
genetic pool, is activated when the 60th gate is present. My relationship with Jurgen, for example. Jurgen 
has the 3rd gate and I have the 60th gate, and in this kind of connection mutation is something that is 
possible. 

The 60th gate is the gate of acceptance. This is so important to understand. Every single one of the gates 
that come out of the root center that form the formats is a gate of potential depression. The depression 
rooted in the 60th gate says, "This is the way it has always been. This may be the way it will always be." 
It is looking for the mutation. It is looking for something new. The energy is the pulse, and it is the 
pressure to mutate. "I am tired of the old. I am tired of this limitation. I want to transcend the limitation; I 
want to bring out something new." It is always sitting there, waiting. 

Unless the limitation is accepted, transcendence is never possible. The fuel quality is restrained and it is 
depressive. This is one of the things to understand. All individuality, every individual gate that you have, 
is melancholic by nature. Melancholy is about happy and sad. It is not emotional. Please understand that. 
It can be when it is out of the 22/12/ 39/55. If it is not out of one of these gates, it is a mechanical 
moodiness. It is a moodiness of happy and sad. In that sense, the depressiveness of all individuals is 
subject to melancholy and it becomes more and more intense when they feel limited. The only way to 
transcend the limitation is through mutation. 

It says above the lines: The acceptance of limitation is the first step in transcendence. Nothing is more 
complex than knowing. It has more gates. There is more circuitry involved. It is deeply complex for 
knowing to really mean something that is truly clear. The first step in transcendence is to accept 
limitation. All individuals have to accept limitation as the beginning of their transcendence process. 
Otherwise, they can never transcend. They have to accept the limitation of being individual. 

60.1 Acceptance 

The first line is called Acceptance. As we know, the first line forms the foundation. This introspective line 
has Venus exalted. The ability to maintain inner harmony when confronted by external limitations. This is 
a key here. Harmonic energy that can deal with external limitations. This is what the 60th gate is all 
about, to accept limitations and maintain your harmony, to allow the limitation to be there because the 
one thing that the 60 knows (this is not about awareness knowing; this is in its genetic material) is that 
mutation is always possible. The limitation can always be transcended at some point. All it has to do is to 
accept the limitation. 

Mercury in detriment. The drive for diversity that when limited, can become restless and agitated. Here 
lies the melancholy that is inherent in the 60th hexagram and inherent in the individual process. That is 
the chafing against limitations: the individual that is forced to be influenced. Put an individual child in the 
classroom where it is forced to be influenced, forced to be disciplined, forced to be communal, forced to 
be collective. All of these forces imposed on them and them having to accept the limitation, they become 
restless. 

I have my design Mercury in this line. I had a wonderful experience when Neptune came to the 60th 
hexagram. Under normal circumstances, with my Mercury in this position, whenever I was confronted by 
limitation I would immediately get restless. Once I found that out about myself through design, it became 
something very valuable to me. I often use this example to help people understand that detriments are not 
bad. The moment I recognized how my Mercury operated, I recognized that what it was doing to me was 
a great service. It was always pointing out to me the moment that I was not accepting my limitations. 
Because it was mechanical, it did not require awareness. So the moment I saw my own restlessness, then I 
could look and see: What is it that I am not accepting? Why am I suddenly so restless? Since Neptune is 
transiting the 60th gate, I don't have this. It is veiled. I do not have this normal mercurial contact in me, it 
is just veiled. It is just not there. This is an interesting process. 

Restless energy when confronted with external limitations. I was the kind of person that whenever there 
was an external limitation that I could not overcome, I would get very melancholic. It would make me 
sad. That sadness would drive me in my restlessness to get out of that situation. What is lying at the very 
root of the individual process is that nothing is going to happen for the individual until they accept their 
true nature, until they accept their limitation, their individuality, until they accept that they are a freak, 
that they have to explain themselves, that they are different, that they accept that nothing is permanent, 
that mutation can always take place. Then, they are open to transcendence. The 60th gate will provide the 
genetic material as a mutation that will lead to what can be knowable. The 60th gate is biological. 

60.2 Decisiveness 

When we get to the second line, we get to the line of projecting outwards. These people are projecting 
outwards that they can accept limitation. Most of them can suffer a great deal from the pressure in their 
life. Remember that this is just a projection of the nature of this hexagram going out. It does not 
necessarily mean that they really are accepting the limitation. What they project outwards is that they are 
accepting the limitation. 

This line is called Decisiveness. Saturn exalted. The understanding of the nature of limitation, to accept 
its restraints when necessary and thus be able to take advantage of opportunities when they arise. In the 
white book: Energy which can adapt to restraint. Basically, these people project outwards that they are 
restrained. They don't know that there is anything at the other end of the channel. So every once in a 
while somebody breaks through that and they have a doorway to that limitation. Generally speaking, these 
people are always going to be restrained and in that restraint, in accepting that limitation as a projection, 
there can also be the deep melancholy inside: Why am I accepting this limitation? Is this limitation really 
of value? Is this limitation the right direction? Is this limitation the mutation that is necessary for me? 

When we come to the other side, to the Earth in detriment, we have: An adaptation to restraint that 
becomes habitual and maintains the nature of the limitation even when it no longer exists. This is the 
whole thing to recognize about this second line. Because it projects out that it will accept the limitation 
and be restrained, the exalted side is always open to the possibility that the limitation will end and then it 
will seem like, "Aha, to accept the limitation was the right thing to do." 

On the detriment side of this energy: The energy for adaptation that can get stuck without eventual 
mutation. The limitation suddenly gets taken away. You have somebody who goes for a walk every day in 
West Berlin. When they get to the place where the wall is, they turn around and walk home. When you 
take away the wall, they do not cross that point. The limitation is gone but no mutation, no change of the 
path or the way. This is the other side of this second line. 

There is a deep addiction to the limitation in the second line: people who get addicted to their medicine 
even when they are healthy. 

60.3 Conservatism 

Individuals, by their very nature, get stuck in habits. They eat the same food every day, they go for the 
same walk every day and in accepting the limitation, it is always possible that the mutation can take place 
and something extraordinary happens. Very often, they just get stuck in the very habit itself. 

When you come to the third line, you have the theme of trial and error, of bonds made and broken, and it 
is called Conservatism. Saturn exalted. Enlightened self-interest that naturally handles restrictions and 
limitations, ensuring identity and security. 'Enlightened self- interest...' This is the gate of limitation but 
this is the third line which can always break the bond of the limitation. It does not mean that they 
transcend the limitation. By breaking the bond, they discover that a new limitation comes in their way. 
This is their learning process until they finally can get to the point where they can accept that limitation 
will come and be transcended on its own terms and not on theirs. 

Remember the mystery of mutation. It takes place between the pulses, in the gap between the pulses. It is 
truly a mystery. What goes out old comes back new and one has not participated in that moment of 
transition from one to the other. 

In the white book this Conservatism is: The energy to maintain identity and security despite limitations. 
That identity and security is there in the individual. They say, "I break this bond with this limitation. I will 
not sit here and hold back. I go over there." They hold on to their identity and to the security of who they 
are but at the same time, when they go over there, they will meet another limitation and they have to deal 
with the same thing again. Just because they break the bond does not mean that they transcend the 
limitation. This is their learning process but ultimately, in its resonance, it can lead to wisdom. 

On the other side, we have Mars in detriment. The ego gratifying self-interest that ignores limitations and 
suffers predictably. It ignores the limitations because it can break the bond, but it is not breaking the bond 
hoping to transcend it. It is breaking the bond only to get away from it. In trying to get away from it, one 
will suffer the consequences because you can't. It can lead to the melancholy and the depression that is 
always possible in the 60th gate. 

Energy which ignores limitations and pays the price. Again, do not see these detriments as being negative. 
This is not the case. What appears to be a negative is not. It depends on the nature of your awareness. In 
the individual process, we will always meet individuals who will ignore limitations and are willing to pay 
the price. After all, this is the format for individuality and if you get to the behavior of individuality in the 
10.3, you get to The Martyr. It is built in here to break the limitation and pay the price. So many of us 
honor martyrs. Go to any little town to their square and you will see a statue of someone who has been a 
martyr. They are exalted afterwards. They will pay the price. Everything has a price. This is not negative. 
It is only a mechanic. 

60.4 Resourcefulness 

The fourth line and fifth lines in this hexagram have a very special advantage. V% know that they are by 
their very nature transpersonal. They can go across the channel and recognize that there will always be 
that process at the other end. Built into the genetic recognition of the 60th hexagram is that the 3rd 
hexagram and its mutative capacity is always waiting on the other side. People who have the fourth and 
fifth lines of the 60th hexagram have a much deeper capacity of accepting temporary limitation and the 
constant recognition, the constant deep knowing within them, that mutation is something that is always 
possible and will come, because they will meet it all the time. 

This line is called Resourcefulness. It lies in being able to release oneself from the pressure to mutate. In 
recognizing that, by accepting the limitation, you know that the mutation will come anyway because you 
know that there is a 3rd gate at the other end. 

Mercury exalted. The reasoned and intelligent maximization of potential within limitations. In other 
words, while you are waiting for that limitation to end, it does not mean that your whole life gets focused 
on that. The moment that your whole life gets focused on waiting for the limitation to end, you will be 
melancholic and depressed. These people have a very sad look on their face. Rather than waiting for the 
mutation to come, this is simply about: there are other things to do. Let's do other things within this 
limitation because deep inside of us we know that mutation is always possible. In the white book: The 
maximization of potential within limitation. 

Venus in detriment. A tendency in times of limitations to seek the inner meaning of the restriction rather 
than using its gifts to find a harmonic application within the limitation. The former leads to withdrawal 
and the latter to transcendence. In other words, transcendence is always possible in being fixed in 
accepting the limitation. The detriment in this case is always going to have difficulties with that and as the 
line says: The energy to know rather than accept limitation at the expense of possible mutation, leading to 
depression. 

It is very important for anybody who has the fourth line of the 60 and has never come to understand this 
through Human Design to recognize that the moment that they understand that the 3 is there and will 
always be there for them, is the opportunity for them to accept the limitation and work within it. 

Remember that individuals do not like being limited. But the limitation always has to be there for them 
before transcendence can be possible. By the way, in the vast majority of cases, people who have Venus 
in this line are going to suffer from a lot of depression. Depression is also going to be evidenced in the 
way in which they look at the world in which, for them, there are all kinds of bad people and good people. 
They have a deep moralistic twinge with Venus being the force behind that. Very important for these 
people to know how mutation works and the fact that it is always something that is possible for them. 

60.5 Leadership 

Whenever we get to the fifth line, we get to how the hexagram is perceived by others. It is interesting to 
recognize that this individual limitation, this acceptance, is considered a leadership function by the 
totality. In other words, this leads to what we know in the 2/14, in the channel of being a Keeper of Keys, 
as the individual providing direction for the totality, and that capacity is in the recognition that within the 
60 lies all of this old information. It is there. Because it has this equipment, it is projected on it that it can 
also naturally take them to the next stage. 

Leadership. Neptune exalted. That is a lovely place for Neptune being exalted. Totally veiled. The 
awareness that the destruction of the old limitations simply creates new ones. This is the resonance to the 
second line, to the Decisiveness, where this lesson is first understood. This results in behavioral patterns 
that demonstrate this understanding through actions and enhances leadership potential. This is so 

important. If a limitation is not transcended, the fifth line knows that you have to wait and accept what is 
until it can be transcended and in that sense, it has a leadership capacity. It can act as a role model and it 
can guide others to wait. 

In the white book: The energy to handle a lifelong process of dealing with limitations. Other people are 
always projecting on the person with the 60.5 that they can handle a limitation, and thus they draw the 
conclusion: if they can handle the limitation and we can't, they are certainly the ones that can guide us 
through when that limitation ends. That may or may not be true. 

Jupiter in detriment. Where the natural desire for expansion, when limitations are essential, creates 
confusion from the top. This is the whole thing about the fifth line. Due to it being projected upon, it does 
not mean that it really got it. It is given the opportunity to get it, to show that it can accept the limitation 
until the time is appropriate to make the transcendence. 

In the white book: Expansive energy that cannot handle limitations. But other people are dependent on 
this energy; in that sense, the whole planet, because without mutation, evolution is a dead end street. So 
the capacity to lead is always projected onto the 60.5. They can lead others into limitations and trying to 
break them when, in fact, once you have broken them, there is still another limitation. 

This is the way they used to punish prisoners in America. They would make them dig a trench, a long 
ditch or a huge hole in the ground. At the end of the day they go to sleep, and the next morning they go 
out to the same place and they have to fill it all back in. You get rid of that limitation, you dig your way 
out of that and then you fill it back in, and you start all over again. This is very depressing. This is the 
nature of this detriment. It can end up being very depressive for whatever value that has, to be guided to 
constantly break the limitation that cannot be broken. 

Limitations cannot be broken, they can only be transcended. When it says in the detriment, 'confusion 
coming from the top', it means it is coming from the leader. The moment that the leader is not accepting 
the limitation but giving others the direction of trying to break that limitation, they are only going to be 
confronted with a new limitation. So the leader, the one at the top, is confusing all the others below, 
guiding them to believe that they can break the limitation when in fact they cannot because another 
limitation will simply replace it. 

All fifth lines are in a dilemma in which they may or may not be equipped to live up to the projection of 
others. You see that the detriment of fifth lines is not able to live up to that. If you are a 60.5, you have all 
these people who are waiting for you to act. You may be under so much pressure that you are depressed 
by not acting because every individual wants to play out that role in which they can provide that guidance 
and direction. 

60.6 Rigidity 

The sixth line is the line of transition and here it is in a mutative gate and a mutative channel. So, it 
represents a mutation that can be quite profound in the nature of what is possible in the mutative field. 
The line itself is called Rigidity, and it has Uranus exalted. 

The intuitive intellect to recognize when absolute rigidity is essential but with innovative applications to 
lessen its severity. A fixed energy that is unusual in its capacity for restraint. One of the things about the 
nature of the sixth line is that it is so clear to it that restraint and limitation is everything because 
remember that all sixth lines are looking at the whole circuit and they are looking at it in order to see 
whether or not they make a commitment to whatever their theme is. This sixth line in its rigidity is saying 
that there cannot be any kind of commitment. "I will be restrained. I will accept any limitation because 

nothing will work unless mutation is present. If the mutation is not there, I will be absolutely rigid in 
restraint." What that means is that these are people who are very rigid in accepting their limitations and 
they will rarely engage at that level. 

When you come to the other side, you have Mercury in detriment. The dogmatic, principled and carefully 
reasoned understanding that is uncompromising in its severity and often coldly brutal in operation. In the 
white book: An uncompromising and severe acceptance of restraint, so uncompromising that the restraint 
may become unbearable and lead to chronic depression. Here is somebody who says, "I have to be 
restrained. I have to accept the limitation. Otherwise, there will never be mutation, but I hate it. It is 
driving me crazy. Why can't there be a mutation? I can't stand it." This is being so unhappy with the 
rigidity and being fixed on it. When you say to these people, "Hey, relax", they get annoyed and 
depressed at you recognizing their rigidity, that they are stuck in that, that they hold on to that. 

What happens to the sixth line here is that, in our genetic terms, very little mutation comes out of the sixth 
line that affects the nature of the genetic material of a human being. It is rare that any genetic material is 
mutated through this line. When it does mutate, it does not bring a mutation that is recent but brings a 
mutation that is deeply recessive. It brings something out from deep down somewhere in the past. That 
can be of enormous value or not, like all things having to do with the nature of mutation. 

What is important to see is that where the 59.6 will refuse to be intimate and may never be fertile because 
it cannot see that intimacy is worthwhile, the 60.6 will not provide any mutation because it is not going to 
engage because of its rigidity. So they will not provide a lot of mutative material. The mutative material 
will only come in those instances where the mutation is so profound that the whole process of the 
individual circuit can be lived out. For the sixth line, the only limitation that can be transcended is a 
limitation that is truly transcended. It is gone, over, finished, onto something new, and until that moment, 
they can suffer a great deal from being forced within their own nature to wait and be restrained, to accept 
the limitation. 

This line always reminds me of a story. There is a monk going to a Zen temple and says, "I want to see 
the master." The gardener brings them inside and tells them to take off their shoes and sit in the garden. A 
couple of minutes later he comes back and says to this man, "I am very sorry, you have to come back in 
20 years. We will call you and we will tell you when you can come." The monk becomes totally rigid in 
this acceptance of the limitation that he cannot see the master, and he comes back every year, takes his 
shoes off, goes into the garden and asks whether he could see the master. That story has a joke to it 
because one day he comes, takes off his shoes and is allowed to see the master. The gardener comes and 
tells him, "The master will see you today." In that moment of the rigid limitation being broken, he is very 
excited and nervous. He goes wandering around in the garden and finally finds the master sitting there. 
The master looks up to him and says, "Where did you leave your shoes?" Of course, he couldn't 
remember. The master sent him away. No mutation took place. 

HEXAGRAM 61 INNER TRUTH 

The collective mind, the abstract and the logic, are so deeply related to each other, they need to be 
fulfilled through each other. Yin and yang, if you will: the basic dualities coming together into some kind 
of Tao. The collective process is rooted in what already is, in what has been taken in during the life 
movement. In other words, as we are alive and moving in space, we interact with the environment as we 
move. The abstract person interacts with that environment in its relative present and reflects on it as a past 
phenomenon. The logical person goes through this movement and takes in the information and projects it 
into the future's path. They are in the same kind of business. They are in the business of relating to what 
they have gone through. But when you come to the individuality of the 61, when you come to Inner 
Truth, none of that exists. This is not a visual mental process. It is acoustic, like everything having to do 
with the individual process. The 61 as an inspiration is not the visions passing through the mind but the 
static noise inside of the mind that keeps the mind occupied. 

Whenever you deal with individual knowing at the mental level, it is very important to understand the law 
of the knower which is to know what is knowable and of value, to know what is knowable and 
unnecessary (you don't necessarily have to know how a jet engine operates to get by in this life) and to 
know what is unknowable. The knower has to leave alone what is unknowable. If you don't know what is 
unknowable and you can't leave it alone, you go mad. 

The 61st gate, Inner Truth, is a wonderful image. You have this yang sandwich with a yin interior, so that 
the inner truth is really penetrating to all this yang propaganda to get to the yin essence. This is the gate of 
mystery. This is the gate of 'my-story'. This is individual knowing which is a spontaneous mutation. 
Because of that, it has no foundation in either the past or the future. It is not a sequence. It is not a pattern. 
It is this spontaneous, mysterious my-story, this mysterious knowing. 

The fuel is the pressure of the unknown or the unknowable. This is what is driving the 61. It must know 
for itself. It must know in the some way that the 28 has to know that life is of value, or that the 55 has to 
know deeply that a spirit exists in this life. The 61 is the inspiration for the whole mental plane of 
knowing. The 61 wants one thing only: silence in the mind. No voices talking, no dialogue, nothing. 
Maybe music. 

The energy mechanic is the struggle for silence. Please recognize, that 'silence' in this sense means that 
you know what you need to know. Whenever I deal with the 61,1 always go to the oracle of Delphi which 
says, 'Know thyself. "Know thyself is the only thing of value to know. Everything else is secondary. If 
you know yourself, the unknowable is you and you do not have to seek the unknowable at all because the 
moment that you truly know yourself, you know the mystery of life because you get to live it, because 
you are designed for your mystery, for your story. 

What the 61 wants to know is: What is my story? Who am I? How does it all work? What does it all 
mean? To get to the inner truth. 

Above the lines in the black book it says: The awareness of universal underlying principles. To know 
what the universal principles are and not to make them up, not to think that they happened in the past and 
believe that they were there, that they knew something that we did not, or that it is in the future somehow. 
You see, the most incredible thing about being human is that the collective is always at the mercy of 
mutation, like the tribe. Mutation is what makes all of this interesting. Mutation is what breaks us out of 
the old abstract cycles. Mutation shatters the pattern and mutation brings us into a new realization, a new 
recognition, a new wonder. It is there all the time. 

61.1 Occult Knowledge 

All first lines give you the essence of a hexagram. It gives you its basic nature. It is its foundation. These 
lines are introspective. Inner truth lies in going inwards, going deeply into this acoustic field. 

This first line is called Occult knowledge. The foundation of all inner truth is in occult knowledge. We 
have another example here of Neptune being exalted in a first line. Thus you know that this is not always 
present. It has been fascinating for me. I have my Design Sun in the 61.1. When Neptune went into the 
61st hexagram and activated the 6 all of the children born with Neptune exalted in this line, and who are 
now six or seven years old, will be great aficionados of the Human Design System. They will be people 
that will bring an enormous value to our society because we only get the activation of the Neptunian side 
of this line once every 165 years, and of course, dealing with the 24 on the other side, you have breaks in 
between which are around 80 years. In other words, there are times when this energy is not available to us 
and it is very important for us to understand that. Most of the time, the Venusian side of this aspect is 
working. 

Neptune exalted. A natural psychic awareness that empowers principles of universalization. This whole 
generation of children that have come into the world with Neptune in this line and their search for inner 
truth can have the validity of recognizing a universal knowing and bringing it into the world. 

In the white book: The pressure to know the mysteries through esoterics. It is keeping that at the obvious 
level: that is the mystery. If you think of the children who have Neptune in 6 Neptune is veiling the 
mystery anyway. They don't know where that knowing comes from. There is still a mystery but the 
answer can come out, the knowing can come out but it comes out very mysteriously. 

Venus in detriment. Where reliance on secret knowledge increasingly demands ascetic withdrawal and 
leads eventually to obscurity. There is so much knowledge that has been lost. Whenever you hear 
somebody saying, "Oh, isn't it a shame that that knowledge was lost," you automatically know something 
about it. It was not universal. Universal inner truth does not get lost. Getting lost is not built into inner 
truth. You have to understand that secret knowledge, knowledge that is not allowed to mutate, will die out 
in the world and is of no value. It is of no value as a universal principle. It is of no value for the totality. It 
is not a knowing that is going to bring an effective mutation. 

Whenever I meet people who have the Venus there, they are always interested in the obscure of the 
esoteric world: how to read somebody's nature in feeling the bumps on their head, or by looking at the 
shape of their toe nails and at the waves on your fingers. I had a student who had Venus in the 24, on the 
other side, and he talked to me about the most outrageous things. I can't imagine anybody being interested 
in that stuff. This is the Venusian aspect. 

Where the pressure can be so strong that one can be eventually incapable of handling the exoteric 
realities. Where a reliance on secret knowledge leads to obscurity and can't bring a universal truth. These 
are people who really think that they know and they are holding on to it because they think that it brings 
them power. 

Please understand something about the nature of knowing. Knowing is of no value unless it is openly put 
out into the world to either be devoured alive or to be a mutation. The moment that somebody has a 
knowing that they do not want to reveal, automatically, up until the point that it is revealed, it cannot be 
of universal value. It cannot mutate unless it goes out into the world. It has to go out acoustically; you 
have to hear it. 

61.2 Natural brilliance 

When you come to the second line, you come to projection. They are projecting out the quality of the 
hexagram. So here you have somebody who projects out that they are naturally brilliant. They are 
projecting out that they know. They are very inspiring. The 61.2 is a very inspiring line. Remember that 
all second lines can be paper tigers. They can project out their brilliance but they may not live up to the 
performance. First, second and third lines, because they are not transpersonal, because they are focused 
on the gate process, they all suffer from the limitation that they are dependent on others. I had nothing to 
do with my 6 Occult knowledge, until I was late into my thirties. I did not have the forces that connected 
up my undefined head center and its 61 to bring out the potential that was lying there inside of me. 
Always look at these things in terms of the nature of the design itself. 

The Moon exalted, and so gifted by this position, a far-reaching, a nourishing influence, free of guile and 
powerfully attractive. In the white book: A gift for inspiration that is both attractive and beneficial to 
others. Here is somebody that is automatically putting out this projection that they know, and their 
knowing is inspiring for others. If what they know does not lead others in the sense that it is inspiring for 
them, that it acts as a role model of inspiration for them, they begin to suffer from the fact that they can't 
live up to everybody else's expectations about themselves, and then they begin to wonder who they are, 
and why it is that way, and why don't they really know what they are supposed to know. 

Mars in detriment. In early recognition of its influence... (its brilliance, its know-ability) ...becomes ego 
obsessed with maximizing its effects. In other words: The delusion that any inspiration deserves 
recognition. When somebody connects to you, you say out of the inspiration "I know such and such," and 
the other comes with the 24 and gets very inspired and tries to bring that into rational form. When they 
do, there is this joy for the 61 that the knowing has moved one mutative step and it has become a 
realization. Because they go through that experience of having that happen to them once, they think that 
everything they know deserves to mutate. 

There are a lot of very brilliant people in the scientific community who really have a knowing in which 
they are obsessed with the fact that that knowing will come to some kind of fruition, that it does deserve 
recognition, and that somebody has to see it. All kinds of people on the fringe of science in America who 
have all kinds of knowing about the way things work, such as how plants talk to each other, assume that 
their knowing has to get the same attention as scientific knowing. They assume that whatever it is that 
they know deserves to be considered as something that is of universal value, and everybody is going to 
recognize it. 

The brilliance here is the readiness to release their knowing, their mystery. They are projecting out that 
they know and due to that others can ask what they know, and they either are inspiring or not. 

61.3 Interdependence 

We have seen that when we are looking at the third line and its process of trial and error that belongs to 
every third line, you also see in every third line that these relationships with the other side always come as 
a surprise. The first to the third line is convinced that it is: "I know". They are only within the gate 
process. But the reality is that this line, 

Interdependence, says as a heading: It is exceedingly difficult for truth to stand alone. By the way, it does 
not mean that you can't carry your "I know" all the way to the bank. The reality is that it is exceeding 
difficult because at some point or another, if somebody else does not get to know what you know, it does 
not mutate and therefore is useless. This is the whole thing about being individual and dealing with 
mutation. 

Mutation is very cruel. If you don't know and if you can't explain it, you are really going to suffer; which 
means that, particularly at the mental level, if individuals don't complete the whole knowing circuit 
themselves, they have to find other individuals in their process that they can deal with. It will be very 
difficult for them to deal with people who are mentally collective. For example, I have the 43/23 and the 
61, and JOrgen has the 24. That 24 has to come from somebody who is fundamentally individual, like 
Jurgen. We are both only defined as individuals. It makes it possible to go through that process, but I can 
do it with an individual. It will be very difficult to bring my knowing directly to the collective. It has to go 
through the whole process. 

The Moon exalted. The ability to establish relationships for the actualization of truths, and through their 
nurturing and protective power to ensure a stable environment in which they can continue to grow. 
Remember, this is the frequency of bonds made and broken. You know that it will be very difficult for the 
individual knower to really have relationships that can actualize the truth. It is not impossible, but 
difficult. 

The pressure to know enhanced through collaboration. The thing to recognize is that all third lines, due to 
their resonance to the sixth lines, are breaking the ground for the potential wisdom and peace that lie 
within the sixth lines by going through the mistakes, the trial and error. These third line Inner Truth 
people constantly are dealing with the wrong people. They constantly bang into people that can't help 
them actualize their knowing. Eventually, if they are fortunate, they begin to recognize that there are 
certain people that can be beneficial for them and other people that cannot. 

Mars in detriment. With an abundance of energy and in possession of a truth, the tendency to leave others 
behind or be crushed by their resistance. Impatience with others and the forsaking of relationships. This is 
classic: a third line who breaks the bond. "They can't make my knowing rational the way I want it made 
rational." Remember, you are always trying to be the other side. Everybody who has a question wants to 
bring their own answer. Everybody that has a confusion wants to make sense out of it themselves, and 
everybody that has the inner truth wants to make it rational themselves. It just does not work that way. 
These people are impatient with others. What these people do is: If they do not get their knowing to 
mutate to the next stage, they abandon that relationship and go on to the next one. Other people can be 
quite upset by all that. After all, here is somebody that is inspiring for them and that person simply walks 
away from them. As far as they are concerned, they don't have what it takes. This is their process of trial 
and error. 

61.4 Research 

When you get to the upper trigram, to the fourth line, you are dealing with the single- mindedness. When 
you look at the 43.4, which is part of this stream, you have the One-track mind and this gives you a very 
strong idea about the nature of this fourth line. The fourth and fifth lines are transpersonal; they are able 
to recognize that there is the potential for rationalization. 

What they are looking for, in a sense, is to make music with somebody. They have all the sounds in their 
heads and the rationalization is just taking away the static so that the station comes in clear, so that you 
can really get the acoustic picture, if you will. This line, this being fixed on the knowing, is called 
Research. 

The capacity of concentration to explore the depth of inner truth and maximize its application to 
fundamental principles. They are fixed on this "I must know". In the extreme, these people can really 
seem to be mad in their fixedness to know. They must know. That does not mean that they will only 
research things that are valid to research. They can get fixed on trying to know something that is deeply 
obscure. They get lost for the rest of their lives and they never really know. 

I know somebody with this line who is fascinated by numerology. They will spend the rest of their lives 
trying to figure out what that is all about. They are just lost in that. They have to know it. They are 
obsessed with knowing. They want to win the lottery. 

On the other side, Jupiter in detriment. Where the tendency to expansion and integration leads to 
involving others in the research and may end in a diversity of confusing applications. Here you have the 
two sides of the individual process. The exalted side says, "This is my knowing. This is my way. Don't 
influence me. You can go along with me, you can help me out, but don't influence. Don't get in my way. 
This is my knowing. " On the other side you have what is intrinsic in the individual. On one side they are 
resisting all influence and on the other side, they want to be influential because they want to be mutative. 
The other side is not a negative, like all the detriments. It is simply about seeing the mechanic. These 
people will lose that control in that sense. They will be very fixed in that knowing. Due to the fact that 
they desperately want to get to some kind of rationalization, they will involve others who take that 
inspiration and will go in many directions. That may be of value in terms of all the different directions 
that the other people take, but it is very uncomfortable for the individual knower who started that process. 

The detriment on this side is: The illusion that collaboration will enhance inspiration. My advice for all 
individuals: If you are going to be conditioned in your individual mental process, it is better to be 
conditioned by the planets than to be conditioned by a person. That is clear. It is much easier for the 
individual because they will always have the sense of "that is truly myself". It is not coming from the life 
experience of somebody else that happens to have that particular gate and brings that energy through. 

61.5 Influence 

We know that first lines are the essence of the hexagram and fifth lines are how the hexagram is seen by 
the outside or the totality. The one thing that you can see very clearly about the 61.5 is that the totality 
recognizes the power inherent in Inner Truth. What is projected on the 61.5 is that they have influence. 
Think about the difference between the two projective resonances. We have the second line in which the 
projecting out of Inner Truth results in people saying, "Aren't they clever? This is a smart one. This is a 
brilliant one." When you get to the fifth line and the outside is projecting onto the Inner Truth, they are 
saying, "This is the one that knows. This is the one that really has influence because they can bring about 
and inspire mutation." 

Here in this fifth line, Saturn exalted. The enlightened father-figure whose recognized wisdom and 
powerful assertion can mold a generation by its influence. This is very nice. The pressure to know that 
may result in influence and wisdom. Think about the advantages of being a fifth line. Everybody is 
projecting on the 61.5 that they have the inner truth. If they do, their reputation just continues to grow. 
Ultimately, they are seen as a guiding force and a force of wisdom, which may in fact be so or not. When 
it is projected on them that they are the ones who really know and what they deliver is unknowable, then 
all of that will simply crash. 

On the other side of this, Mars in detriment. A tendency in power to want to enforce compliance to ensure 
lasting influence. The pressure in knowing to resent challenges and demand acceptance. In other words, "I 
am the enlightened one. Don't challenge me. I know and you don't." This is their stance in that. They do 
not want anybody to challenge their knowing. Now, of course, they are going to be challenged. The 
collective would never let them get away with it, and they'd better really know. Otherwise, that challenge 
can be something that is very uncomfortable for them. 

61.6 Appeal 

In our process of looking at the lines of transition, we talked about how the nature of the line is that it is 
looking at the entire circuit. It is looking for the potential fulfillment of the whole circuit before it is ready 
to make a commitment. This 61.6 is a mutation of that, if you will. It is not quite like any other sixth line. 
What the 61.6 is interested in is not only fulfilling the whole individual process, the right direction, the 
role model, the ability to explain it, the social spirit to be able to share it with others, the penetrating 
awareness that brings it into the existential now. It is all for the purpose of convincing and explaining to 
the collective how it all works. In other words, for the 61.6 this is not just a matter of trying to make a 
commitment to the fulfillment of the individual process, but it is a commitment to go beyond the 
individual process to be actually able to mutate the collective. So there is an enormous lack of 
involvement in inner truth by 61.6's. They are rarely getting their inspiration out. Why bother, unless that 
inspiration will get all the way through that whole individual process and be able to mutate the collective 
field? 

It is called Appeal. Pluto exalted. The profound attunement to the collectivity that can lure the public to a 
truth. Inspiration that can bring clarity to the collective. Pluto will eventually get there some time in the 
next 20-25 years. They can bring something new to the collective. A truly mutative gate. But the knowing 
that lies here as inspiration, remember that inspiration is not awareness, still has to be rationalized. It still 
has to become an insight it still has to be explained. It still has to go through all of these processes. 

If a 61.6 is just sitting there alone and it does not have any of all the other attributes, it is looking out at 
the individuals that it meets and the process that it goes through and says, "I will not tell them what I 
know. This will never be of any value. This will never be able to mutate that collective." It is so common. 
The moment that a 61.6 is engaged in inspiring others, you know that they are going to have impact on 
the collective, positive or negative. 

On the Martian side: A reliance on shop-worn cliches and slogans that may be new in their level of 
energy but inevitably fall on deaf ears. This is the whole problem for the individual. It always has to find 
a way, a language or a methodology to reach out to the collective that is so different from the individual. 
So often the individual meets the very thing that they are: deafness. All individuals are deaf. They do not 
listen to anybody. What they get is a whole collective that is deaf to them as a possibility in their process. 

Of course, what that means is that here, in the detriment of the 61.6, there is this sense that you will never 
be really able to get it across. Let's give them a couple of mantras and see how this works, but basically 
this is like, "I am not going to get involved with this because it is going to lead nowhere." This is the 
aspect of, The delusion that inspiration can bring clarity to the collective. 

In the 61 st gate we always have potential delusion until there is a way to explain the nature of that 
knowing. Both of them are attuned, please understand that. The exalted has the inspiration to bring 
something new. The detriment can recognize what the collectivity needs. They just don't have the real 
mutative force to bring it across. They simply know the language for them but not the real knowing 
inside. So these sixth lines stand back. In standing back and being there in the world, they are part of our 
world aura. There is always the potential that true mutation can take place and can have a vast impact on 
the collective. All mental mutation has to have this as its backbone. 

Unless individual knowing can be accepted by collective understanding and sensing, mutation has not 
taken place. The potential to touch the collectivity with awareness at the mental level is rooted here in this 
sixth line. It is there. The collective exists and the individual at the mental level knows it, and its ordeal is, 
"Can I mutate them? Can I get that across to them?" That is their process. 

With my 3's, I have been busily mutating all of you for years at the mental level because that is part of 
what the process is: to bring an individual inspiration to the collective mind. Once that individual 

inspiration is explainable, if then the collective, the logic and the abstract, can grasp it. The mutation has 
taken hold. 

No sixth line standing back there from the distance sees that that is an easy thing to do. They may become 
very picky, like all sixth lines, so picky that if you go to the 24.6 on the other side, you end up looking 
The Gift-horse in the mouth. You become so picky that you do not get to see it when it is there. 

The 61.6 leads over to the 60.1. In both of these gates lies the potential to mutate. One is the pressure to 
mutate mentally and the other is the pressure to mutate genetically. The 61.6 waits for the 24 and the 60 
waits for the 3. It goes through the limitation of carrying with it all the possibility to allow mutation to 
take place. When the 3 comes, the mutation can take place in order to bring the mutation into the body, 
into the genetics, into the cells, into the DNA. The moment that the 3 is there, you have the structure of 
the cell itself. It is not enough that knowing is something that is only mentally mutative. It has to be 
biologically mutative. I have the 61 toJiirgen's 24 and I have the 60 to his 3. Thus we can bring the 
potential for mutation. 

HEXAGRAM 62 PREPONDERANCE OF THE SMALL 

Where the abstract process creates a story, the logical process is actually creating the language, the source 
of what we call language. The key to what language is lies in the 62nd gate because it is the gate of giving 
things their names. After all, this is a channel of organizing humanity at the intellectual level and in order 
to do so, we always have to have common access to meanings. 

The names are actually another word for formula. We have a formula that says 'tree,' and we teach 
everybody that the thing that we see out there, the word that we use for it is 'tree'. Once everybody accepts 
that formula, we have a basis for a form of communication with each other. 

Facts are primary in our life. All these basic formulas are primary for us. It is this detail to make sure that 
everything not only has a name, but the moment that it has a name, we have a clear understanding of what 
that is. I am somebody who spends his adult intellectual life trying to arrive at the correct names for 
things, so that we have a common ground in our ability to understand the nature of the world and to 
project into the future. Everything about the 62nd gate is about the capacity to find the detail in what you 
are expressing, so that others can truly understand. 

We are now looking at the logic side of the mind. On the logic side, you have a different process. In the 
56th gate, I told you that we are dealing with two metamorphic gates that are involved in a process of 
translating what we see in the mind into what we call language. We have seen that the 56th gate is a gate 
of stimulation, of telling the story of humanity, of telling the story of the human way; so that is ultimately 
what human nature is all about. The idea or the conceptual part of the abstract mind is the ability to see 
sequences within the mind which you translate into a story, so you make a movie out of it and tell your 
tale. 

When you come over to the logic side, it operates differently in its conceptual process. Logic is fixed on 
patterns because only out of patterns can logic work. The patterns can then be tested. On the intellectual 
level, we can call these patterns formulas or theories or opinions. They can be presented and then they can 
be tested. The pattern can be tested. The whole process of the logical, intellectual mind is to translate 
these inner patterns and to bring them out into language, to be able to describe them. 

Because of that, the 62nd gate has a different metamorphic quality than the 56th gate. The 56 is there to 
tell a story in order to get a message across about the nature of what it is to be, but the 62 has to name all 
of those things. It has to give them their name. This is a gate of giving things their names and describing 
them so that they can be understood. 

This is a factual voice. This is not the voice that says, "I believe" or "I do not believe". This is a voice that 
says, "I think" or "I do not think." Rather than being about hope or sorrow, it is a voice that is either 
reasonable or unreasonable, reasonable logic or unreasonable logic. This 62nd gate is the gate of Maya. 
The Human Design System is the mechanics of the Maya. It is an absolute of the mechanics of the Maya. 
The Maya is the illusionary world that we live in and in which we need to measure everything. This is a 
gate of measuring. It is measuring by giving things their names. 

When you are dealing with somebody that has the 62nd gate, they are trying to organize their mental 
image and they are trying to get you to understand them. The storyteller just wants you to make sense out 
of their story, but the logical person is there to give you the facts and is trying logically to convince you 
and organize you through those facts. By the way, somebody who can produce good facts and articulate 
them well, that does not mean that they are right. It just means that this is something they can do. We all 
know, in a world of statistics, how facts can lie and cheat us, how theories can fall apart, how very good 
opinions can be meaningless. Don't get involved in any kind of moralistic distinction here. This is just 

about a mechanic. Everybody who has this 62nd gate is trying to be factual in the way that they get you to 
understand them. 

Above the lines in the black book it says: Caution, patience and detail produce excellence out of 
limitation. This is the essence of what it is to be organized. The fact of the matter is that all collective 
processes are there to be shared, and there is a tendency to share collective mental processes before the 
right time, before one is really clear. Caution, patience and detail produce excellence out of limitation. 
The limitation is the pattern itself, in order to truly be able to understand the pattern. 

Please understand why we have to understand the pattern. If we cannot understand a logical pattern, we 
cannot project comfortably into the future. The abstract looks at the past in order to tell us what our 
experience has been as humans, so that we can develop this wealth of information about our processes. 
The logical process is about establishing a ground, a framework upon which we can build our future. We 
know this mostly from our politicians. They tell us that if we follow their pattern, everything will be 
wonderful in the future. The scientist who says, "I have this formula. If we can only get it into the 
marketplace, we will be able to cure all these people in the future. I know that if I have the opportunity to 
discover this and that, I will be able to do that in the future." There is always this projection out into the 
future, so it requires caution and patience in order for the true detail to be there. 

62.1 Routine 

All first lines act as a foundation for a hexagram. This first line is called Routine. That is the nature of 
being organized and the nature of being able to come up with the facts is rooted in a ritual of life in which 
that process is a routine that goes on all the time. It never stops. The Human Design System has a 
mystical source but it is a logical system. As long as it exists in the world, there will be people that will 
test it. Rightfully so. Everything that is logical is endlessly tested. This is the nature and the beauty of 
logic. For every test, we confirm or not the validity of a pattern and then we can project into the future. 

This line of Routine has Neptune exalted. This is a funny planet to have as a foundation of coming up 
with facts. The ability to transcend the boredom of routine through a rich and daring fantasy life. When I 
deal with people that have the 62nd gate (I have my design Earth in this line), I tell them that one of the 
things that I recognize most about the nature of the logical mind is that you need to project into the future 
within your mind because you rarely are going to have a chance to actually do the real experiment. It is 
very difficult to get energy to ideas or opinions because they are simply there to be shared at a 
communicative level. 

So often, the detail of the 62nd gate is built on fantasy. It is built in the imagination. "If this works what 
happens then? And after that?" This is the inner logical process of trying to see how the pattern will work. 
But it is a fantasy. It does not have to be reality. It is a way of exploring the logic. By the way, when I say 
fantasy, I am just talking about a mental process. We are talking about a process in which you look 
inwards at the mechanics of what that logical pattern is, and you are trying to see all its possibilities 
before you present it because otherwise, you get all kinds of people saying, "Is that true?" and then you 
have to back it up with facts. Where do your facts come from? You can not necessarily back it up unless 
you have gone through this inner process of looking at the possibilities. 

I was trained as a scientist and the first thing you know as a scientist is that the moment that you establish 
any theoretical principle, you'd better be your biggest enemy. Before you tell anybody about that principle 
and that theory, you'd better make sure that you have looked at all the possibilities of why it could be 
wrong. Look at the possibilities before you open up your mouth and say, "Hey, look. E - mc2" and 
everybody looks at you and says, "Oh, then prove it." 

You have to have this process of looking inwards. Remember that this is a foundation. It has to look 
inwards. It does not know anything about the opinion. It just wants to see, "How is this pattern going to 
work before I can present the facts?" 

In the white book: The ability to organize the detail through fantasy. Or rebellion against doing the very 
same thing. In other words, "I have got it. I have the facts now. I will give it them to you. Here they are." 
But if you do not have this background inside? You see, the logical process has the greatest difficulty of 
all the processes in finding a motor. If you go down the channel of Talent, a part of the logical process, 
from the 62, you go to the 48 out of the splenic system, which is not a motor. It is not so easy to turn a 
logic theory into an experiment. It is very difficult to do that. 

So, underneath this first line are two realities. First, it is like when I was given the Human Design System 
from the voice, I spent two years by myself before I brought this to anybody. I checked my own chart, 
watched the Moon. I did not know about any of these things, so I had to go through a learning process 
before I could do anything about that. I had to explore in detail and caution before I told anybody, "Hey, I 
have got this stuff from the voice." I had to make sure that the details were there, before I got it out. I 
knew that I was going to meet all that resistance on the outside. So, one thing to recognize about that 
whole process of the logical mind and its outlet is that one has to be very careful. The details have to be 
there before one decides, "Now, I want it to be experimented with." 

The other reality is: Rebellion and its enormous waste of energy. I know so many examples of the 62 
standing there. "Listen. Could you please give me the money so that I can try this out?" They come up 
with a logical concept and they spent all of their energy trying to convince people that this is worthy of 
experimentation, rather than using their energy to make sure that they are right and correct. The logical 
process attracts all the judgments of the world. Logic always will. Logic is universal and it is the only 
thing that is going to protect us in the future. Anytime that we make a logical statement, it is natural for 
other human beings to say, "Is this true? Prove it to me so that I can see for myself that this is true. 
Otherwise, I will not accept it." The detriment side is somebody who spends all their energy trying to get 
somebody to finance, to give energy to their theory, rather than knowing clearly what the theory is. These 
are the two sides of the foundation of the 62nd gate. 

62.2 Restraint 

When you get to the second line, these people are often caught in a trap. All second lines carry within 
them the potential of being paper tigers, that is: they project out something they are or are not necessarily. 
It is not their fault. Second lines do not have this ability to look inwards. The first line knows that it can 
do detail work. That is why it gets bored. It has the capacity to do detail work and it really has to get into 
the detail. The second line just projects that out. It is like the child that sits at home and studies. It is 
focused on doing the detail, but that is a projection. They are projecting out that they are doing the detail. 
It looks like they are doing the detail. It does not mean that they really are. This is just a field of energy 
that they are projecting out. Of course, that paper tiger can collapse because the teacher can come up to 
them and say, "All right. Let's see the detail." And they answer, "Well. I have not finished yet. I did not 
get there." This is a projected field, and it is not necessarily the truth. The child is not necessarily working 
on that detail. 

This line is called Restraint. The innate restrictiveness and discipline to comply with and exalt restraint. In 
other words, they really stay with the detail but all too often it just looks like that. 

In the white book: The discipline necessary for detail work. But not all the time as a guarantee that the 
detail work is being done. It is there as a projected field, but it does not really mean that it is working. 

On the other side of this, Mercury in detriment. The intellect stymied by severe restraints tends to anxiety 
and restlessness. Think about what this is like for these people. They are projecting outwards that they can 
do the detail work, but they do not know why. They are not the first line. The first line knows that detail is 
essential. The second line just knows, "I am projecting out the detail." But they do not know what is 
essential in that detail. 

It is like the 62.2 child that is staring at the book, and they do not know what to stare at. They are just 
looking there. It looks like they are deeply focused and concentrated and taking it all in. Then you say to 
them, "What are you reading?" and they look at you like you are mad. They can't answer the question 
because they do not know what they are concentrating on. They become restless and anxious. 

This is the dilemma of the 62. You do not get a chance very often to live out the experiment. It is so rare. 
When I did the Caring Course last year in Hamburg, I talked about the nature of how this works. You just 
end up with committees that have committees that study a process and maybe one day the process will be 
actualized. Then you have the review committee that reviews the committee of the committee and they all 
go through this logical process, and we build this fantastic bureaucracy to get nothing done. It is very 
difficult for logic to get access to energy and built into that, because it is difficult, underneath is all this 
restlessness. "Now that I have got it, I want to try it." 

Both the abstract and the logic process are about communicating successfully, and not about doing 
successfully. Only when somebody can properly communicate their story or their theoretical premise or 
opinion, only then do they have an opportunity that others may come. That is what it is all about. These 
are, after all, collective gates. 

In collective circuitry we have no social channels. There is one individual social channel and two tribal 
ones. The collective is by its very nature social. Every collective aspect inside of you wants and needs to 
share. The reality here for the second line is to understand that they are projecting out that they are doing 
the detail but they have that crushed. There is always going to be the paper tiger syndrome where it falls 
apart and, underneath that, there is all this restlessness that says, "Yes, but I just wanted to try, and I 
cannot spend all my time dreaming about this. I want to try it." These people get very restless. 

Always remember that that is not a negative. I keep on reminding you of that all the time. Mechanics has 
no morality. There is nothing to say that this is bad. They are not all paper tigers. Some of them are 
wonderful and the ones that get deeply restless can be such pains in the neck that you actually give them 
the money to do the experiment, just to get rid of them. There are advantages in everything. Human 
beings have this tendency to see everything on the black scale. Everybody looks at their own chart and 
always looks to what they assume to be the worst aspects. The worst aspects are always the best, but you 
do not recognize them. 

62.3 Discovery 

I love this third line because it is one of the best examples for the nature of third lines. Remember 
something about Human Design and the beauty of its symmetries. Not only do we look at the gate that is 
before, we look at the gate that comes after in terms of the wheel and there is always one exactly opposite 
which is the mirror image. The mirror image of the 62 is the 61. The opposition of detail is Inner Truth. 
The only way for inner truth to come out, ultimately, is that it has to come out factually. Otherwise, it is 
not truly the truth. 

If you look at the hexagram of Inner Truth, you will see that in the middle of that hexagram are two yin 
lines sandwiched between two sets of yang lines, and the yin is the material and the fact. It is essence or 
the framework of things. When you are dealing with the 62nd hexagram, there are so many things 

involved in that hexagram to be able to try to find the way, out of the inspiration of inner truth, to give us 
a factual and logical way that we can understand these things. The more that humanity understands that in 
unison, the easier it is for us to live together in the world. That is what understanding is all about. 

This third line is called Discovery. Everyone I have ever met that has this line hates it. They never really 
understand it and they don't like it because all third lines are about trial and error. They are about making 
mistakes. This is the great line of mistake-making. Due to that fact, it is also the great line of discovery. 
This is Pasteur making a mistake and finding something. This is the story of hundreds and thousands of 
inventors, scientists, researchers or explorers who go in the wrong direction by mistake and find 
something totally new. This is the essence of this line. 

It says Uranus exalted, and for a third time in these collective gates we have the word 'genius' and we 
have Uranus exalting it. A genius for the unusual. The ability to discover valuable information in detail 
work and to find innovative applications for this knowledge. This 'unusual'abil iy is the ability to make 
mistakes, and out of the mistakes, you learn. 

Remember what I have said about the nature of wisdom. In the hexagram structure, we have these 
resonances. This third line is in resonance to the sixth line. There is no way to that wisdom and there is no 
way to logical truth without mistakes being part of the way. Over the last weeks, I have been watching all 
kinds of scientific theories that have been postulated and then you immediately see the scientific 
community coming back from other areas saying, "Wait a minute. I do not see how this works. They 
made a mistake." 

It is all about that. Was there a mistake? Does the mistake lead to something? Does it lead to discovery? 
This is the essence of what this line is all about. Whenever you see a third line in your chart, honor that. It 
is about getting into things and getting out of them, learning from them by getting into them and getting 
out of them. It is not about holding onto them until you really understand. Here in the white book it says: 
The unusual gift of finding and expressing valuable details. 

On the other side: The expression of dissatisfaction and boredom in detail work. Now look, this comes 
out of something else. It is: A dissatisfaction with the monotony of detail work, where what is missed 
may be of great importance and value. Now look what happens to these people. They start doing an 
experiment and it goes wrong. Instead of looking at what happened, instead of looking what went wrong 
and what the result of it going wrong is, they just say, "I am sick and tired of trying to do this. I do not 
want to do it anymore. I am tired of making mistakes. I will never get it right, and that's it." If they had 
gone into the nature of their mistake and what they learned, they would not repeat again. This is the whole 
thing about the third line. If you cannot handle this mistake, if you cannot get into it and see, "Aha, okay, 
well all right. Next time." Remember that we live in a very special age. Please understand that. For 
everybody who carries third lines inside of them. 

In the 25th hexagram in the third line, in the nature of universal love, in the initiating force that is within 
ourselves, we have the capacity to be able to withstand failure and survive it. With Pluto in detriment, 
because Pluto has not been there for hundreds of years and it will not be there in our life time, this is an 
era for us where we learn from our mistakes. This is why we have such an enormous field of discovery 
that is taking place in the 20th century and in the late 19th century. Mistakes will not punish us now. This 
is an era in which mistakes can be deeply rewarding because they can lead to all kinds of discovery. 

This is the nature of this line: to recognize that it is okay to make mistakes because you are only 
communicating, you are not doing. Communicating mistakes is perfect. You have a theory which you 
share; you have your opinion and you start talking about it. The other person says, "Wait a minute. This 
and that is missing. This does not work, you made a mistake." And then you have a chance to go through 

that whole process again, and you have a chance to see whether you should stay with it, whether you need 
to fix it or whether it is time to drop it and move on to the next thing. 

It is a process about accepting that learning is like that. I know what this is like. I have a 43.3/23.3/4.3 
mind which is all unconscious. It is impossible for me in my life process not to have made thousands of 
intellectual mistakes. That is how I learned. It is a learning process, to go through things and learn from 
them. It is so important for people who have this not to get stuck in thinking that because they made a 
mistake, they are not of value. We turn the word mistake into one of the dirtiest words around. We 
associate mistake with failure, with a problem. None of these things are so. It is a legitimate process for 
growth. 

62.4 Asceticism 

When you get to the upper trigram, you get to the fourth line, to the line of externalization, of being fixed. 
You also get to the beginning of the transpersonal process, so the 62.4 is well aware of the fact that there 
is an opinion that is coming at it from the 17th hexagram, that there is an organized concept that it has to 
deal with and that it has to bring detail to. It is not like the first three lines. It is not simply caught up in its 
own process of providing detail, but there is a recognition that the detail has to do with opinion. It has to 
do with something that is coming from the outside. The first line always represents the foundation. When 
you are dealing with detail, the first line is very important because it will establish the groundwork, the 
framework upon which any formula can be built. When you get to the fourth line, you get to the ability to 
project out into the world, in the sense of externalizing that basic formula. But because there is a 
limitation in this, because the fourth line is transpersonal, it recognizes the difficulty inherently, 
genetically. It recognizes the difficulty of how long it takes to get the detail right. 

This line is called Asceticism. The perfected ascetic withdrawal in the pursuit of harmony and simplicity, 
where outside dangers do not exist and there is time to pursue inner meaning in detail. "Don't bother me, I 
am thinking." This is the fourth line. "Don't ask me to present a paper for your journal because I have not 
finished my research." These are people that are always busy doing their research. "Leave me alone, I 
have not come up with the answer yet and I will not talk to you until I have the detail." "If you start 
bothering me while I am in the middle of this process, you are really going to disturb me and you will 
ruin my harmony if you will not let me finish this." 

You see that there is an immediate understanding that it really takes time to get the detail right because 
the moment that you do not get the detail right, what you get is a lot of complaints. Opposite the 17th gate 
that feeds the opinions to the 62 is the 18th gate, the great gate of complaining and correction, of 
challenging authority. "I will not trust you unless you give me the facts," and the fourth line knows that 
the best way for them is to avoid all of that until they really got it. By the way, they can die before they 
really get it. That is another story. 

Detail that can only be expressed after periods of isolation and reflection. Anybody that has the 62.4, I 
always tell them the same thing. "Wait and see. Do you homework and your research, get into your stuff 
and work at it." Fourth lines are always saying, "Where is the opportunity?" You can wait for the 
opportunity. In the moment when the opportunity is there, then you can externalize. These are people that 
need to be left alone in their process. If you have a child that has the 62.4 and it is studying for an exam, 
don't ask it questions in the middle of its studying. "What are you working on, dear?" Don't ask them 
anything. Leave them alone and let them go through their process to the end, so that they can be 
comfortable to come out and say, "Yes. Now, I have the detail." 

On the other side of this, Pluto in detriment. The urge to take action against established values that when 
restrained by circumstances leads to withdrawal that waits for opportunity. In terms of the white book: 

Where the detail is organized, isolation as a strategy waiting for the right opportunity for expression. Very 
Plutonic: "I'll wait until they come to me and then I will take them by surprise. They do not know that I 
have really got it and the moment they come to me, I will go, 'Ha'." It is a strategy. It is so important for 
these people to wait. Wherever you see a fourth line, you know that it is saying to you, "Stay with your 
process. Wait for your opportunity to come and then you have the advantage of being able to project that 
out." Asceticism is very important in that process. In resonance to the 18.4, this line feels incompetent 
because the detail is not complete. 

62.5 Metamorphosis 

This is the great line of Metamorphosis. This is the great line that comes up with wonderful theories and 
understandings. It is always projected on these people that they are the people that have the detail. That is 
okay if you are 40 years old and you have collected some data, but when you are five or six years old and 
everybody is projecting on you that you are the one that has the detail, that is not so easy. 

The fifth line says: When excellence is achieved, action is necessary. When detail has been achieved, 
when all the detail has been done. These are the people that attract the energy. The fifth line is the line of 
universalization and all fifth lines operate in the emotional wave of seduction. All fifth lines are seducers 
or the seduced. All fifth lines, because they are seduced by the projection of the outside, can in turn be 
their seducer if they can produce. Everybody comes at this fifth line and says, "We know that you have 
the detail. You tell us." May be they have it. 

Moon exalted. The reaching out to others to share, symbolized by the Moon's phases as it moves from 
darkness to eventually fully sharing its light. This is the basic formula. Everything having to do with the 
logical process and everything having to do with what we call talent, all of these things take a long time to 
mature. Most of us do not reach any real state of understanding about the nature of our being until we are 
somewhere between 40 and 50, if we are lucky. The vast majority of human beings never really get to that 
point. 

The whole process about this ability, of having all of this projected onto this fifth line ("We know that 
you have the detail"), they have to have the inner discipline, they have to have the Restraint that is in the 
second line (the resonance below) until they really do have the detail. They know that everybody is 
projecting on them. This is the kind of child that goes into the classroom and knows that the teacher is 
going to ask them. They know it, and they do not want to be asked. They may not be ready. Because they 
know that the teacher will always project on them that they have the detail, if they don't do their 
homework, if they don't study, they get caught out and feel very embarrassed because they know that they 
are being projected on. 

To be projected on is always an opportunity to fulfill that projection and more, but it also means that there 
is always this threat of humiliation, that you are caught, in that sense, because it has been projected on 
you and you are not delivering. 

In the white book: The understanding that only when the details are complete can action or expression be 
initiated. Fifth lines need to understand that it is okay for them not to commit themselves to the 
projections of others until they are ready. When they learn to wait, they have the power. Then, it works 
for them. If they do not learn to wait, if they get seduced by everybody else's projection, they end up in 
situations where they become less and less comfortable with what detail can be for them, and then you 
come to the other side of this. 

Neptune in detriment. A tendency in metamorphosis to seek acclaim through dramatic presentation. In the 
white book: When the details are organized, the need for attention demands expression. Because these 

people can be projected on, they can really do their best to try to seduce you with their facts, and they 
will. They will do their very best. They can to get you to understand. This is one of their favorite things. 
"Do you understand what I mean?" You can hear that in all languages. They keep on emphasizing this. 
"You are projecting on me that I understand, but do you understand?" This is this process that goes on. 
Because they can be very frustrated in that, they will often stand up and say, "I've got it. Eurekal" and 
make their big dramatic presentation, and they often fall very far because that is the whole thing about 
logic. It is so easy to tear logic to pieces because you need to have the detail. If you do not have the detail, 
it does not work. 

The whole thing about this is to understand the way the planet looks at this line, the way the planet looks 
at detail. It looks at the detail and says, "If you have the detail, why don't you give it to us as a finished 
product?" The whole business with the HIV epidemic. You have all kinds of research, people who are 
trying to find some kind of process in which they can relieve or cure HIV. The moment that some 
scientist comes up with some genetic marker that he or they think may (if they work on it) become this or 
that, you have this outcry of people who say, "Now that you have got that detail, why can't you 
experiment with it on us?" Then the scientific community gets under all kinds of pressure because the 
outside world says, "Turn the detail into fact, into a living reality," often before it is time. This is the great 
pressure that is on the fifth line. 

Because there is so much pressure put on them from the projection of the outside, they have to be the 
disciplined ones that say, "I can't afford to allow that projection to pull me in until I have my details." 
Most of these people have to get a good education. Anybody that has the 62nd gate needs to have a good 
education and when I say that, it does not have to be a formal education. But these are people that need to 
do their research in life. They need to look into things. They need to explore. They need to do the process 
of collecting the detail. It is very important for them. And the nature of words for them will always be 
very important. How to get people to understand. How to present them with a verbal formula that allows 
them to see the pattern and the picture. 

A good example is this meteorite that they knew came from Mars. You had these guys that were slicing it 
open and all of a sudden they thought that they saw things that looked like very primitive, early cellular 
structures. They made this dramatic presentation which was in the front pages of all the newspapers. 
There was a news conference and everybody was saying, "Life on Mars." These guys are having a tough 
time now because the whole scientific community jumped on this data, and they told them: "Look, you 
have got your experiment wrong. This is not right and it does not work." They are sitting there with 
shame on their face and say: "All, you know, we think it does, maybe. '% don't know." Dramatic 
presentation can get you into trouble. The projection of everybody else on them once they had these 
details, which they had had for about 10 years, put pressure on them to release that information, and then 
the whole thing blew up. All before NASA had enough money to send new projects to Mars. 

62.6 Self-discipline 

So we get to the sixth line, to the end of this process, to the line of transition. The keynote of the sixth line 
is always whether you trust the process or not. Are the details valuable? Are they really of value for 
humanity? Is this really something that I have to spend my life on? Is it really worthwhile to put all this 
energy into detail? This is the question the sixth line will always ask. 

It is called Self-discipline. It has Saturn exalted. A penny saved is a penny earned. Detail as the path to 
material success. Sixth lines can always be successful out of their detail. Most of them end up just using 
that capacity to make money, to stay alive and to look after themselves. The real detail, the deep detail 
that they are capable of; they often never get there, like all sixth lines. There is a part of them that says, 

"Well, is it really worth it? I am not looking at the gate or at the channel. I am looking at the whole circuit 
now." 

When you look at the whole logical circuit out of the sixth line, what you are looking at is the capacity to 
be able, out of love, to guide humanity in the proper direction into the future. The 62.2 is saying, "If I 
can't guide humanity with love into the future, I am not going to worry about the detail. I will just look 
after myself." 

In the detriment of this: The gift for, but not the discipline, to do the necessary detail work to succeed. 
The skills but not the discipline to succeed. There is a wonderful joke. When you get to the 62.6, the very 
next hexagram is the 56.1. When you get to the end of the abstract process in the 56.6, you want to be a 
31.1 and you want to lead logically. When you get to the end of being 62.6, where you have the gift for 
detail, you want to go over to the 56.1 and tell the story of how it all worked. The 56.1 is there to tell the 
story about the achievements from the past, to reflect on the past and tell the story of how it worked. 

The 62.6's do not care about anything. What they really want to be able to see is, "Tell me what the world 
will look like after my detail becomes the guide for humanity." That is what they want. They want to 
know how it will actually work. They want to project into the future so that they can go back and reflect 
into that imaginary past and say, "Aha." 

The first line of the 56 is called Quality. Is it really the detail that is of value? For the 62.6, it is very 
difficult. The only time that you ever capture the sixth line is when they have the impression, "That is the 
thing for me." Then they will give their gift to the collective. If they do not find their thing, they don't care 
about their gift, they do not get involved in the collective, they stay for themselves and say, "I just know 
my detail, and I'll be able to tell my banker that he made a mistake. There are nine pennies missing on my 
account." 

HEXAGRAM 63 AFTER COMPLETION 

There is a beautiful joke. If you look at the heading above the 64th hexagram it says: Transition, like 
birth, requires a determined strength for the passage through. It refers to the channel of determination and 
thus to the logical format. Determination is necessary to find the way and to get through. Inherent in this 
description is the logical aspect that the collective, in its duality, is always looking for. When you are 
abstract, logic can be very attractive and if you are logical, the abstract can be very attractive. 

When you come to the 63rd hexagram and you look at the heading above the lines, it says: In the spiral of 
life, all ends are beginnings. This is describing the abstract format. So, there is this nice little twist inside. 
Those of you that studied the throat center lines will remember that, by the time the abstract gets to 
manifestation, it wants to be logical and by the time the logic gets to manifestation, it wants to be abstract. 

The 63rd hexagram is the gate of doubt, which is the pressure of suspicious patterns or not. This is the 
whole thing. Where the abstract is trying to realize out of sequences from the past based on what it 
experiences in the present, the logic, with what it experiments in the present, is trying to project into the 
future. It is trying to project out of a pattern. If that pattern does not project into the future, then we have 
doubt and suspicion. 

The mechanic here is mental patterns focused on the future, and it is the question. This is a gate, as an 
inspiration, that is always asking a question, looking for the answer. If you can come up with the 
question, you will get an answer. There is 'nothing new under the sun' for a collective being. Questions 
are deeply inspiring. The best questions I was ever asked in my life came from 63's. The best questions I 
ever asked myself in my whole life came from 63 transits, particularly when the Sun and Mercury transit 
this gate together. 

63.1 Composure 

We have the foundation and the line that is introspective, so it is looking inwards. The nature of doubt is 
to be composed. Composure, as this line is called, is very important. Remember that this is agate that does 
not get to really feel complete, will not see its doubt eliminated, until it can hear the detail come out 
through the 62nd gate. That question not only has to be answered with a formula by the 4th gate. It has to 
generate an opinion out of the 17th gate and become a detailed description out of the 62. 

Sun exalted. The quality of personality where achievement is accepted with equanimity and where 
continued development is allowed to take its natural course. Acceptance of achievement but doubt 
whether continued development will take place. These people are always afraid that their question will 
never be able to be projected out into the future so that it will finally get to the point of detail, and they 
can really let go of their suspicion and doubt. 

Whenever somebody comes to me with the 63rd gate, the most important thing that I tell them is, "Make 
sure that everything in your life that you doubt and are suspicious of, you have to prove yourself. You 
have to get the detail. Only then is it possible to let go of doubt and suspicion. Otherwise it is not. You 
meet somebody and you are suspicious about them, you have to be composed, give them the benefit of the 
doubt and see the whole process through. Wait and see if they will give you the detail. If they give you 
the answer, then you can let go of the suspicion." 

On the other side, Mars in detriment. The tendency in achievement to immediately seek new goals at the 
risk of destabilizing what has already been accomplished. We are trying to see whether a pattern works in 
the future, or not. This whole thing is about recognizing in that moment of inspiration whether there is 
something wrong with the pattern or not. That kind of mind is busy when there is something wrong with 

the pattern. The moment that you discover that there is something wrong with the pattern and you get it 
worked out, you have to let go of that. The Martian side always goes from one doubt and suspicion to the 
next, no matter what is happening. Endlessly. It is always seeking out a new goal, which means that it is 
seeking out a new question, a new doubt. 

It is like the 1 8th gate always being able to point out, very clearly, where something needs to be corrected. 
It is always looking for patterns and the doubt and suspicion in them. These are very suspicious people. 
To be deeply suspicious and untrusting is at the root of what it is to be logical. When people have this, it 
is our morality that says, "This is not nice. Love your neighbor and trust them." If you do that, you are led 
down the primrose path and you end up in ideology, which is on the abstract side. It is very important to 
understand that logic is rooted in suspicion and doubt. If the suspicion and doubt are missing, the logic is 
never going to be challenged, to be tested, proved or disproved. 

63.2 Structuring 

When you get to the second line, remember that second lines are projecting. So, wherever you meet these 
people, they are projecting out that they doubt you and are suspicious of you, whether or not that is true. 
That is something that will always come out because it is the nature of the line. 

It is called Structuring. What this line reveals (remember that the second line is in resonance to the fifth 
line, which is the universalized nature of the hexagram) is that it is interesting, as most people say. It is 
the question and not the answer that rules our future. It is the question that has all the power. The question 
is the inspiration. 

There are two things that can happen to the people that carry the power of the question. Once that 
question is responded to, the 4th gate comes and wants to bring an answer. They hold on to the power of 
being the questioner. "We looked through our spectroscope and we saw that space seems to be 
compressing. How does this come about?" Somebody comes up with a theoretical answer called the 
'black hole.' The question leads to the answer. This will always be the case in the logical process. 

Jupiter exalted. The establishing of a large framework through which achievement can be expanded and 
shared; ... Remember that this person is projecting out that they are full of doubt and suspicion, so people 
automatically come to them and say, "What's the matter?" "I don't really know whether this will work. 
Can it work?" They are automatically seen as the ones that are projecting out their doubt, -compensating 
others for their contributions while maintaining control of direction. There are so many physicists for 
example, who came up with the question and they had hundreds of assistants who developed the answer, 
but they are the ones who are remembered because they had the question. "I have this question. Who does 
this work?" and then they delegate the responsibility. 

The pressure to share one's doubts with others while still maintaining control. "It is my question. I don't 
care if it is your answer. I asked the question." 

On the other side, we have Uranus in detriment. Instability in achievement that when in positions of 
authority leads to arrogance and the desire to keep others away from the center of power. The moment 
that you can ask the kind of question that gets that kind of response for an answer, you have authority. 
This is the scientist that goes out and writes a paper for nature, signs it with his name and he leaves out 
the 116 assistants who did all the work to get it together to that point. They are the ones that are saying, 
"Yes, I have the answer to this. I have this answer to that," and he ends up, as a questioner, taking the 
authority. 

These are the two sides to structuring. These people are always afraid of somebody else coming up with a 
better question. The competition of the collective is incredible. A question is always inspiring to 
someone. It inspires this drive to come up with an answer in the same way that confusion is inspiring, 
because it brings people to try to resolve the confusion for the other. It is all about the other. 

63.3 Continuance 

When you come to this line of trial and error which is called Continuance, and particularly in the wave of 
bonds made and broken, you recognize that certain questions are important at one point in the life and are 
no longer important later; or you recognize questions that are really off the track because a question is a 
question, and not all of them are the same. Every question is unique. 

Jupiter exalted. The dedication to the new beginning that insists on maintaining its achieved principles 
despite having to interact with those who have not attained such a state. What that really means is that 
these people have a question and they are never satisfied with other people's answers. They are looking 
for their own answer but they can't get their own answer. But they are never really satisfied with anybody 
else's answer. 

Doubts that one can maintain one's principles when interacting with others. "Can I really get an answer, 
so that I can get rid of my doubts through others? Every time I ask this question I get answers from them, 
but it does not satisfy me. I still doubt it, and I am still looking for my answer." This is all about trial and 
error. The person with the question is always meeting people who have answers and they learn right away 
that not all of those answers are for them, even though they may seem like they can be the right answer. 

On the other side, Saturn in detriment. Success at any price. Success at any price means insisting that your 
question is answered. The exalted side of this will actually go along with people who say, "Yes, the 
answer is this and this." In that moment, it will make them feel like, "Maybe that is the answer" and in 
that, they begin to lose their principle of getting the answer that is correct for them. The detriment side of 
this is deeply stubborn. In the extreme, every time these people ask a question, nobody's answer is right. 
None of them are right. They are never right. 

The pressure to eliminate the doubt at any cost. "I must have the answer." These are people who go on 
enormous investigating searches. These are the people whose inspiration, their question, may be a 
mistake.. Because the question is an error, the answer may prove to be of enormous value. It is one of the 
jokes of life. Science thrives on trial and error, on mistakes. A question can only be a mistake in the sense 
that the question itself is not properly configured. These people do not really know what they are asking 
for. The answer is always in the question. That is why the questioner has so much power. That is Socrates' 
game. 

Remember where the nature of this pressure is rooted. The head center opens up for us information from 
the deep gray areas of the brain. What that means in the abstract process is that you have all of those 
video clips, and you collect them. It is a moving recollection from the past. When you are looking to the 
logical side, all these patterns are coming through. 

63.4 Memory 

The fourth line is called Memory. The question itself is rooted in the patterns and you have to have 
enough patterns for comparison to recognize that there is something wrong with the pattern in the first 
place. There is a deep memory capacity here in this fourth line to have these patterns, which ultimately 
can lead to the powerful detailing of them if it gets to the 62nd gate. We are in the upper trigram and this 
is a line of externalization. So we know that it is very fixed in its doubts. 

Mercury exalted. The detailed accounting of the achievement process whose information base can prepare 
a new order for the future. The fourth and fifth lines are transpersonal. They know that there is a gate at 
the other end of the channel and because of that, they know that their doubts will be answered. The 
answers may be good, bad, right or wrong, but they do know that they are always going to meet an 
answer out there. 

The pressure to explore the doubt in detail as a foundation for eventual formulizing. These are people that 
look at the patterns in detail. It is out of the depth of their patterns that they have as a memory resource 
that they can really ask a very sharp question. They have the background and a lot more to offer than the 
person at the other side. The only difficulty in terms of this being a collective process is that they are very 
fixed in their doubt and suspicion. They are very fixed in getting their question answered. They are very 
fixed in what they are looking for as a response. For other people it can seem that they are really 
obsessive about their pattern. That can be uncomfortable for other people. 

Mars in detriment. A willingness to forget in the glow of victory, with a possible price to be paid later. 
'Glow of victory' is the possibility that you will get an answer if you really have a good question. 
Remember that this line knows that the answer will come. They want to make sure that their question is 
really rich in its pattern detail so that they can get an answer that is appropriate. 

The pressure and risk to forget the details when the doubts have been answered. Here is somebody with 
all the pattern images that they have in that system of theirs. They recognize that there is something 
wrong because of that in another pattern. They ask the question of that pattern, get an answer to why it is 
wrong and they forget all the other stuff they were looking at to get at that point. Because of this, when it 
comes to projecting into the future, they do not have all the information that is necessary for them. They 
won't have all the things that they need for the final detail. What happens to these people is that after a life 
time of getting answers only to that aspect of theirs and leaving out everything else, they have a totally 
different perspective about how things will move into the future. In many ways, they simplify things for 
us because they leave out a lot of detail. 

Throughout this discussion of lines, we have to remember that it is always conditioned by the nature of 
their design. If you have this line without access to the 4th gate in an undefined throat and ajna center, 
that is quite a process. All of that is conditioned, and it is difficult. If you are somebody that processes 
that through, obviously, this is a different experience. But the reality is that you come up with a different 
kind of logical process. 

For example, you have science writers who are people that understand the science but they leave out vast 
amounts of detail. So they just give you the logical pattern so that the lay person who does not understand 
all the little detail can grasp what that science is about. So these people can be very effective for us in that 
way. Remember that none of these aspects are ever going to be about good or bad. It is not about 
restricting this way of asking a question or that way. It is just about seeing that there are different 
mechanical ways in which those questions will arise, and they bring out different kinds of processes in the 
answers. 

63.5 Affirmation 

When we come to the fifth line, we come to the line of universalization. The first line establishes the 
nature of the hexagram and we know that the nature of the 63rd hexagram is to be composed in your 
doubt. But the way in which society and the world sees this hexagram is that they see it as Affirmation. In 
other words, these are the people that can prove it for us. In the abstract line (in the 64.5) we have the 
people that everybody thinks can promise them some kind of sense, the abstract answer. Here it is 

assumed and projected onto the 63.5 that these people can come up with exactly the right question. Doing 
so, they can affirm everybody else's question. These are the kind of people who, in group situations, 
always ask exactly the question that everybody else really wants to have asked. Everybody is waiting for 
them to ask that question because it is projected on them that they will. Remember, it does not mean that 
they can. Then, of course, they have to deal with the result of that projected field. 

Sun exalted. The authority and sincerity of purpose to pursue the same values in the new beginning that 
had allowed it to transcend the old. In the white book: The understanding that doubts are necessary and of 
value. All doubts are necessary and of value because the questions will be answered. But more questions 
exist and it is an ongoing process, so the doubt is feeding this process. Doubts inspire others to come up 
with the answers. Coming up with an answer or a formula is about protecting the collective in the future. 
That is why the expression out of the G center in this circuit is the Alpha who is going to lead us and 
protect us as they take us into the future. 

On the other side, Mars in detriment. Atendency in triumph to pay lip service to such values, and given 
such leadership, these values will be reduced to nothing more than empty ritual. Doubting one's very 
process despite understanding, and simply going through the ritual of doubt. There are so many people 
who are just into the ritual of doubting. It is always projected onto these people anyway that they are full 
of doubt. So it becomes their way of living in the world. Everybody projects on them that they doubt and 
they nod their head and say, "Yes, I am suspicious. Yes, I doubt this," without being necessarily able to 
come up with their own question. This is very important. It is projected on this line that they are the ones 
that have the question that will end the doubt and suspicion. Because they do not have it and because they 
are under this pressure from the moment that they come into the world, they can get to a point where, on 
the other side, they just pay lip service to that whole process. They say, "Yes, I do have my doubts. I have 
not found an answer yet." 

Due to the fact that others project on them that they do have the answer, they discover very quickly in life 
that nobody wants to hear their question. People with this line who have projected on them that they have 
the doubts and suspicions, the moment that they can deliver a good question is the moment that they are 
on the steam roller. They get the authority. They have the power. Everybody assumes that their question 
needs to be answered. These people end up controlling the laboratory. Their names will end up in the 
headline for asking the question. If you have the right question and the right answer, you can be set free 
until mutation blows that all apart. The logical collective is desperately looking for that. For example, we 
do accept that one and one is two. We don't have to ask anymore whether or not that is valid. You can get 
to a point where there are no more doubts. 

After all, please remember the duality of Human Design. Every channel, every gate, every line has an 
inherent duality within it. The gate of doubt is also the gate of not doubting at all. Doubts are only a 
process. One does not have to identify with doubts. The whole thing about the logical collective is, "Give 
me an answer that liberates me from my doubt, so that I can go into the future in peace knowing who I 
am." Showing people who they are is what the Human Design System as a logical system does. That is a 
kind of answer that says, "Here is the fixed mechanic. You do not have to doubt anymore." When people 
ask me what I do, I tell them that I tell people that it is okay. Once you understand that that is the pattern 
and you live with it, it is okay. Then you get rid of all the doubts and suspicions. Only those logical 
people are the ones who are the great testers of Human Design. "Is it really true what he said?" is their 
question, and they test it out endlessly. Abstract people know Human Design in a different way. They 
know it through their sensory system. 

63.6 Nostalgia 

When you go to the sixth line, you get to the line of transition. It is looking beyond. It is looking to the 
whole circuitry. When you are looking to the whole logical circuitry, a question has to end up being 
something that is not only answered but its detail is brought out. It has to then be experimented with. It 
has to be perfected. It has to be corrected. It has to be focused and concentrated on. That whole process 
ultimately leads to that coming out as a role through the love of Humanity in the 15, as a role in the 31/7 
to guide and lead humanity into the future. But this sixth line is called Nostalgia. These people are very 
bizarre because the mental logical process has nothing to do with the past and has everything to do with 
the future. But remember, what the sixth line is like. Because it is waiting, it has this kind of longing to 
see the whole circuitry fulfilled through its commitment to that. The moment these people have a good 
question that is answered, they always remember it. "I asked my grandma that question when I was six, 
and I got the answer. It is still good for me today. It was the best answer I ever had." Or, "My friend 
Harry, one day when I was on the beach, he walked up to me and answered my question. This was the 
best answer I ever had." It is rare that they get answers that really work for them. They are a sixth line. 

Jupiter exalted. The good sense to avoid turning the previous struggle into an obsession. 'Good sense' is 
already abstract terminology. They have the good sense or not. If they do not have it, they get totally 
involved in that. 

In the white book: The logic of leaving old doubts behind. Either the good sense or the logic to leave it 
behind. You had your question and your answer. Do not keep on going back to "that was great". Think 
about our world. We have already seen that there are many lines that are not activated in our lifetime 
because of the effect and impact of outer planets. So, here we come to a situation where in the late 1940's 
to the early 1950's, Pluto was in the 4th hexagram, on the other side of this 63rd gate. Pluto fixed the 
detriment in this line. It says: Revolutionary nostalgia. One of the things that astonished me in my work is 
that I meet very logical people who try to tell me about Atlantis. "They had the answer then. It was better 
in the past. It was all better back there. The Egyptians were great. They built these pyramids. They had 
the answer." 

Illogic and the potential obsession with old suspicions and doubt. We have a whole generation of logical 
people who don't get the logical answer for the future but they say, "It was better in the past. Let's go back 
to the farm. Let's go back to rural life. Let's go back to dancing around the fire place. Let's go back to the 
sweat lodge. Let's go back to all these old things because they had the answer." Logical people. It is one 
of the great jokes of our time: logical people being incredible illogical. This is the nature of this sixth line 
and because we have this powerful plutonic field there, all those people are keeping that energy alive. It is 
clear as we move more and more towards Aquarian consciousness, when the last children who were born 
in the late 40's and 50's are dead, we don't have to deal with that for 150 years. You have people who will 
say, "This was crap. It was never better in the past. They had their answer for their time." 

If somebody says something exciting in the news about what is going to happen tomorrow (for example, 
somebody has developed a new medicine), their immediate response for that future is to go into the 
revolutionary nostalgia. They go into the question and say, "Wait a minute. They knew that answer long 
ago." You can look at esoteric magazines which are hilarious. Every time somebody comes up with a new 
scientific thing, there is someone writing an article stating that some tribe had that already. It reminds me 
of the Russians during the communist era who were responsible for inventing everything. I am joking 
about that, but it is very important for us that the logical mind is pointing towards the past. 

My logical mind was pointed towards the past and thus I was able to see the validity in the answers that 
were there. What is unusual for the logical mind, normally, under this Plutonic influence, is that it has led 
a lot of people to look into past patterns, to try to make sense of what could be future patterns. This will 
only come out of the sixth lines. All sixth lines carry this mutative quality because they in themselves are 
transitional. 

When you go from the 63.6 to the next hexagram, you get to the 22. Out of the 22.6 will be the grace that 
releases the mutation that will bring us into spirit consciousness. It is very important for us that we do 
have access to the past in this time, so we look at those old patterns. I never knew anything about the 
I'Ching. I was astonished by being offered those patterns to look at. 

The 63.6 keeps on saying, "Yes, but they had this before." It is waiting for the mutative force in the 61 
which says, "There is something new to know." Then the whole process begins again. The abstract gets 
confused by it and the logic is doubtful and suspicious of it. Unless the 61 is doing a good job, they get 
killed or ignored. 

The collective sixth lines are visionary, though I am still not comfortable with any term yet to describe 
what that sixth line does. It is intangible. To know what the whole circuit will be out of that is really 
intangible. Both the 64 and the 63 can be timeless. Because both processes are linked with time, the 
moment that they are in the heart of confusion or the moment that they are in the heart of the doubt, all 
time disappears. We have time problems logically and the 17th gate is the worst time keeper in the world. 
The 17th gate causes everything not to be on time. It always has, and it always will. That is what it is 
going to do. There are time problems inherent in the collective logical process. Time can be there, and 
not. The theoretical physicist who talks about 'no time-space' talks about such things. It is only possible to 
theorize that out of logical premise. Logic plays with the future and plays with the way time moves. 

HEXAGRAM 64 BEFORE COMPLETION 

When we move to the pressure above, please keep in mind the great irony that is revealed by Human 
Design about the nature of the mind. The pressure below was a motor and the pressure above is not. It is 
only a pressure. It is like recycling. It circulates things and brings them back out, but it is not a motor. It is 
just a pressure. That means whatever that pressure instills in the nature of the ajna center, whatever 
pressure comes into being as a conceptualization within the ajna center carries within it no intrinsic power 
to manifest as action. It is so important to understand that. The mind, the ajna center, is exclusively for 
looking at the nature of being. That is what it is there for. It is not there to decide what to do. It is there to 
examine at the three different levels of mental capability the experience of what it is to be alive in the 
world and it is not about doing. 

In the Rave Reading seminar, in being able to define for people that nature of authority in one's design, 
the moment that you come to authority in your design, where your true authority is, you will discover that 
the mind is obedient to that authority. Always. And the moment that you do not know the authority within 
yourself, the moment that you are not living out your nature, your mind is going to rule your life. This 
will be very disturbing. The nature of inspiration, the nature of the head center and its pressure, in the 
collective sense of the word (that is, both in the abstract and in the logical collective) is that it is there to 
force us mentally to make sense of the past (the abstract process) and to project into the future (the logical 
process) in order for us to see within the continuity, past and future, the nature of what it is to be human. 
Because it is collective, we share that with each other. 

The great law of the collective mind is that there is nothing new. There is this attempt to make sense out 
of the past and there is this projection into the future, all out of a relative present. Here in the 64th 
hexagram, Before Completion, we have the gate of confusion. Confusion, as you can see in the energy 
mechanic, is about cyclical mental images from the past. This is the gate of confusion because there are so 
many cyclical mental images which are all from of the past and they are all jumbled together. When you 
look at its fuel, this is a pressure of mental activity or not. This can be the busiest and most uncomfortable 
mind or not. The moment that the mind is trying to run the life, this is very busy and uncomfortable as a 
pressure. It is confused. The moment the mind is not the authority in the life, this is still streaming with all 
the images but that streaming does not lead to stress at the mental level, and does not lead to discomfort 
with the nature of what is there. 

When you are living out who you really are, you are not covered with all the mental activity of all the 
things you should not be; which is impossible for you to make sense out of because it is not what 
belonged to you in the first place. This gate carries with it everything that you experienced from the past, 
and all of that is coming back to you, streaming back to you. 

Above the lines it says: Transition, like birth, requires a determined strength for the passage through. 
Jiirgen made the allusion to the midwife in the 53/42. I have worked with many midwifes who have this 
channel. Here in the pressure of the abstract from the mental plane, this birthing process is also there. It is 
there in its very language. 

It requires a determined strength for the passage through. To make sense out of anything is quite a process 
because there is no logic. There is only time. The abstract mind is nothing but time: all that time past, all 
those things that can be used to finally bring together some kind of sense, the realization that can wait 
when there is contact with the 47th gate. 

64.1 Conditions 

So we come to the first line, the line of introspection, the line which sets the foundation for the hexagram. 
It is called Conditions. Remember that this is the pressure that will lead to historians and philosophers and 
idealists, to ideologies, to all of the things that are part of the abstract mental stream. It is all about 
conditions: to discover the condition itself in which the sequence takes place, in order to give it a 
framework to understand it. 

Venus exalted. In penetrating to the center, the understanding that instills the necessary harmony to 
survive disorder. In penetrating to the center does not say that it is guaranteed that you are getting to the 
center. It is about getting to the center. If you penetrate to the center, then you can survive the disorder. 
Otherwise, you can't. 

Amongst the confusion, the difficulty in finding the point. This is always the very basis of what it is to 
have abstract inspiration, that it is hard to find the point. Having difficulty in finding the point, you end up 
exploring many things. When you do get the point, which will not happen until you get to the other side, 
to the 47, you suddenly have this light bulb realization, "Aha". That is one side of it. 

The other side is Mars in detriment. The powerful temptation, when having transition in sight, to hasty 
action. When you know where the point is, "I have to get there now." An urge to act when you think you 
have made sense of the confusion. These are the two basic sides of what happens to the abstract being. On 
one side, the abstract being is saying, "I am very confused. I am going from crisis to crisis and from 
change to change, and I cannot make sense out of my life. On the other side is the abstract being who 
says, "Aha, this must be it. And if this must be it, I'll try it." Those are the two sides as the foundation of 
what it is to be inspired abstractly. They are driven, in the detriment sense, to try to act out what they 
come to believe makes sense. They can't know because the 64 is only a pressure which is not aware. The 
awareness is in the ajna. 

64.2 Qualification 

Wte come to the second line, to projection. What is being projected out here is confusion. Somebody who 
has this line is projecting out, "I am confused". 

Venus exalted again. Venus is three times exalted and one time in detriment in the 64. An inner 
development which recognizes what qualities are essential for transcendence and the awareness that 
without them, action will fail. Action' here also means the activity of the mind; do not confuse this with 
doing. The action is all related to the activity that is in the description of the channel. It is the design of 
mental activity. It is mental action. 

In the white book: Inner development that can end the confusion over what makes sense. Venus, 
collective gate. They are projecting out that they are confused. Guess what they get. They get all kinds of 
people that want to help them out of their confusion. They get all kinds of people that say to them, "Yes, I 
know why you are confused." That is why they get to learn this because they are projecting out that they 
are confused. They may not be, by the way. That is simply what is being projected out, and then they get 
all these people who come to them and say, "Oh, I feel terrible for you. Let me show you how this works. 
Let me explain this to you. Let me give you an idea." Most of time it is, "Read this book" or, "Go to see 
this therapist." 

Moon in detriment. Constantly in action, it wastes the very qualities and resources that it will need. The 
Moon is mentioned three times in this gate. It brings a lot of drive. Getting lost in confusion and 
burdening the psyche. When you are projecting out that you are confused, you may not even know why 
there is confusion for you, or what it is. You can literally end up being lost in being confused. One of the 
things that I always tell people that have the 64th gate, and that is so important for them to understand, is 

that the 64th gate, of all these mental gates with their theme of not being the authority in your life, this 
gate is truly for others. What you remember about yourself in any situation is automatically a lie. It has 
been censored already. What you remember about yourself in any situation (remember that all of that is 
truly about Conditions) is a lie and always will be. What you remember about others in the same situation 
is of enormous value to them and none to you. Any 64 that can accept that in their life is never going to be 
burdened in that process. That is the whole thing for them. The moment you are trying to make sense out 
of your own life through the 64th gate, welcome to hell. That is what you get. 

64.3 Overextension 

When we get to the third line, we get to the line called Overextension. This line is about trial and error. 
We saw in the format energies that the third line is going to bump into the other side. It is not ready for it. 
It is not equipped, as is the upper trigram. Because the third line is the completion of the lower trigram, it 
always bumps into what it is not prepared for. That's why it is trial and error. 

Saturn exalted. The wisdom to recognize when one has not the necessary resources... (you cannot make 
sense out of it) ... to complete transition. Such timely awareness may give it a chance to seek assistance. 
In that moment, the other is there. In other words, one of the realities of the abstract and logical collective 
experience is that it is dependent on being shared with others, in order to really achieve its fulfillment. 

In the white book: The wisdom to accept confusion as a temporary state that will be resolved in time or 
through others. That is a trial and error process. They are confused because the 64 is a confusing gate. 
They will go through the trial and error of others being able to assist them in that, being able to work with 
them or it will simply come out of a transit. 

Moon in detriment. The risk of a superficially confident personality that when transition collapses, there 
is no one to turn to. Overconfidence that the fates will be kind on demand. In other words, "I don't need 
you to help me with my confusion because I have already learned through my trial and error that you can't 
make sense out of the world for me. I am going to wait for the gods to provide me with that moment of 
satori." Whenever you meet 64.3's, these are people that are always waiting for that moment of 
enlightenment. Somewhere inside of them they know that it is possible. 

64.4 Conviction 

The upper trigram and its theme of externalization. This line is called Conviction. This is a very fixed 
force. It has the Moon exalted. Symbolized by its phases, the Moon is assured of transition, convinced by 
its very process that it will triumph. Every person that has the 64th gate will always get the 47. They will 
get it from transits and people. Because the fourth line is fixed in being there in that process of confusion, 
it also recognizes that regularly that confusion always seems to come to some kind of realization. Those 
with this lunar aspect are people who start off very confused in something, and then go through a process 
where that confusion slowly dissipates. Suddenly the 47 is there, and then there is the opportunity for 
realization. 

On the other side, we have the Mars in detriment. Where force and energy alone cannot overcome doubt. 
No matter how many times the 64.4 gets to realize its way out of a confusion, when the confusion starts in 
its next cycle they are still doubtful that they will be able to get to the realization. The exalted learns that 
lesson and says, "Okay. Ultimately, I will realize." In the detriment: No matter how many times they get 
to realize, there is always this mental anxiety that is generated that they are not able to realize themselves 
out of the next confusion they are dealing with. 

64.5 Promise 

When you come to the fifth line, the way in which this gate of confusion is projected on by others is that 
it represents a great promise. When everybody comes into contact with this 64.5, what they are projecting 
on them is: If the confusion exists and they are active in the confusion, at some point, out of that is going 
to come realization - an idea and stimulation. In other words, what is projected on them is that they will 
somehow come out of that confusion. They may, or may not. 

Venus exalted here, like in the fourth line. The fourth line is already dealing with the other side. That is 
why it can know that realization can come. It knows that there is something at the other side of the 
channel. Here in this fifth line is the deep recognition that there is the 47 over there and what it is all 
about is not whether or not the realization is going to happen. It is whether or not there are the right 
human beings involved in that process, because it is collective. The 64.5 by itself knows that it is going to 
need the 47, the 1 1 and the 56. Otherwise, they will never see how this all comes out. 

This line is about Promise. The promise is that it can manifest in the end as stimulation. The values 
promised in any new order... (the new order is a reference to the process from confusion to realization) 
...are demonstrated through harmonic interaction with others. This strengthens the justification for the 
struggle. The struggle to bring realization into manifestation as stimulation. The struggle not only to make 
sense out of something, but of making sense out of it to come up with an idea which is stimulating to 
others. "This is my idea about what happened yesterday." To get to that point that the confusion can 
finally be clearly discussed. 

Confusion over which values and relationships can bring harmony. The harmony for a 64 is only going to 
come when they hear it articulated out of the 56's voice "I believe". So, they need others. We are dealing 
with a collective process here. 

On the other side, Jupiter in detriment. A tendency in trying to justify the struggle by focusing exclusively 
on the failure of the old order that cannot demonstrate the quality of the new. What happens to these 
people is that they stay stuck in the confusion because as long as they are just the 64, there is no pathway 
to the stream to the 56. It is not there. They do not hear it come out. As long as they don't hear it come 
out, even though they may be able to have somebody that can realize it, it does not mean that it is coming 
out. Until it comes out, they are still stuck in the old confusion. They have not been able to go beyond it. 
All that is about people. It is deeply people oriented. This inspiration is for others and, by inspiring others, 
the nature of what one is inspiring can come out and be revealed. It is all about others. It is very 
collective. 

64.6 Victory 

This line is called Victory. Mercury exalted. The mental assuredness that knew that victory... (to make 
sense, to realize) ...was inevitable, thus making triumph sweet... (you know that the annoyance of being 
confused will always have this sweetness of realization) ...but not reason for excess. The mental gift of 
enjoying the confusion and its diversity of data. This is really the magic that is possible with the 64.6. 
That stream of information from the past will always come through. One can just enjoy the images, the 
stream for what they are. Nothing more and nothing less. It is not up to the 64 to make sense out of it. It is 
up to the 64 to inspire making sense out of it. 

The moment that the 64 lets go of being responsible for the realization, it can enjoy its confusion because 
it is beautiful. It is history. It is the past. There are all the rich things that go through us experientially. It is 
the great dreaming gate. You can't do much with your dreams. It is better not to do anything with them. 
Let them just go through, see them, and watch them. 

On the other side, we have Venus in detriment, only one of the four lines where Venus is not exalted. 
Like the story of the Trojan horse, it can be dangerous to get carried away in celebration, lest one loses 
vigilance and perspective. In the white book: With all that data, it's easy to lose perspective. In other 
words, enjoy the stream going through but if you get stuck only in the enjoyment of the stream, you don't 
get to see the pleasure of the realization of that inspiration. You just get stuck in the confusion and love it. 
I know people with this line who have actually said to me, "Don't try to make sense out of the world for 
me. I like being confused." They will withdraw from all of this. They are sixth lines, after all. The sixth 
line is always ready not to fulfill everybody else's expectation about what that is supposed to be. 

When you meet a 64.6, you do not meet somebody who will give you the impression that they are 
confused. The actual impression that you get from them is that they know something you don't. This is the 
Cheshire smile. It is a very sneaky smile. You have no idea. They may in fact remember something that 
they experienced with you that gives them that sense of that they know something that you don't. It is 
always there. They are standing back. When the 64 reveals their dreams to others, others can form dream 
symbols, not they themselves. They can inspire others to realize out of their dreams. 

